1 CORINTHIANS 8 [†]Now concerning [1] m food offered to idols: we know
that n “all of us possess knowledge.” This “knowledge” o puffs up, p but
love builds up. 2
q If anyone imagines that he knows something, r he does
not yet know as he ought to know.
3But if anyone loves God, s he is known
by God. [2]
4[†]Therefore, as to the eating of food offered to idols, we know that
t “an idol has no real existence,” and that u “there is no God but one.” 5For
although there may be v so-called gods in heaven or on earth—as indeed
there are many “gods” and many “lords”— 6yet w for us there is one God,
the Father, x from whom are all things and for whom we exist, and y one
Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and z through whom we
exist.
7However, not all possess this knowledge. But some, a through former
association with idols, eat food as really offered to an idol, and b their
conscience, being weak, is defiled. 8[†] c Food will not commend us to God.
We are no worse off if we do not eat, and no better off if we do. 9[†]But
take care d that this right of yours does not somehow become a stumbling
block e to the weak. 10[†]For if anyone sees you who have knowledge
eating [3] in an idol’s temple, will he not be encouraged, [4] if his conscience
is weak, to eat food offered to idols? 11And so by your knowledge this weak
person is f destroyed, the brother for whom Christ died. 12Thus, sinning
against your brothers [5] and g wounding their conscience when it is weak,
h you sin against Christ. 13Therefore, i if food makes my brother stumble, I
will never eat meat, lest I make my brother stumble.
Paul Surrenders His Rights
1 CORINTHIANS 9 j Am I not free? k Am I not an apostle? l Have I not seen
Jesus our Lord? m Are not you my workmanship in the Lord? 2[†]If to
others I am not an apostle, at least I am to you, for you are n the seal of my
apostleship in the Lord.
3This is my defense to those who would examine me. 4[†] o Do we not
have the right to eat and drink? 5
p Do we not have the right to take along a
believing wife, [1] as do the other apostles and q the brothers of the Lord and
r Cephas? 6[†]Or is it only Barnabas and I who have no right to refrain from
working for a living? 7[†] s Who serves as a soldier at his own expense?
t Who plants a vineyard without eating any of its fruit? Or who tends a
flock without getting some of the milk?
8Do I say these things on human authority? Does not the Law say the
same? 9For it is written in the Law of Moses, u “You shall not muzzle an ox
when it treads out the grain.” Is it for oxen that God is concerned? 10Does
he not certainly speak for our sake? It was written v for our sake, because
w the plowman should plow in hope and the thresher thresh in hope of
sharing in the crop. 11 x If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it too
much if we reap material things from you? 12[†]If others share this rightful
claim on you, do not we even more?
Nevertheless, y we have not made use of this right, but we endure
anything z rather than put an obstacle in the way of the gospel of Christ.
13Do you not know that a those who are employed in the temple service get
their food from the temple, and those who serve at the altar share in the
sacrificial offerings? 14In the same way, the Lord commanded that b those
who proclaim the gospel should get their living by the gospel.
15[†]But c I have made no use of any of these rights, nor am I writing
these things to secure any such provision. For I would rather die than have
anyone d deprive me of my ground for boasting. 16For if I preach the
gospel, that gives me no ground for boasting. For e necessity is laid upon
me. Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel! 17[†]For if I do this of my own
will, I have a reward, but if not of my own will, I am still entrusted with f a
stewardship. 18[†]What then is my reward? That in my preaching g I may
present the gospel free of charge, so as not to make full use of my right in
the gospel.
19For h though I am free from all, i I have made myself a servant to all,
that I might j win more of them. 20[†] k To the Jews I became as a Jew, in
order to win Jews. To those under the law I became as one under the law
(though not being myself under the law) that I might win those under the
law.
21[†]To l those outside the law I became m as one outside the law (not
being outside the law of God but n under the law of Christ) that I might win
those outside the law.
22 o To the weak I became weak, that I might win the
weak. p I have become all things to all people, that q by all means I might
save some. 23I do it all for the sake of the gospel, r that I may share with
them in its blessings.
24[†]Do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one
receives s the prize? So t run that you may obtain it. 25Every u athlete
exercises self-control in all things. They do it to receive a perishable wreath,
but we v an imperishable. 26So I do not run aimlessly; I w do not box as one
x beating the air.
27[†]But I discipline my body and y keep it under
control, [2] lest after preaching to others z I myself should be a disqualified.
Warning Against Idolatry