2 CORINTHIANS 10 [†] i I, Paul, myself entreat you, by the j meekness and
gentleness of Christ—I who am humble when face to face with you, but
bold toward you when I am away!— 2I beg of you k that when I am present
I may not have to show l boldness with such confidence as I count on
showing against some who suspect us of walking according to the flesh.
3[†]For though we walk in the flesh, we are not waging war according to
the flesh. 4For the m weapons of n our warfare are not of the flesh but have
o divine power p to destroy strongholds. 5We destroy arguments and q every
lofty opinion raised against the knowledge of God, and take every thought
captive to r obey Christ, 6
s being ready to punish every disobedience,
t when your obedience is complete.
7 u Look at what is before your eyes. v If anyone is confident that he is
Christ’s, let him remind himself that just as w he is Christ’s, x so also are
we. 8[†]For even if I boast a little too much of y our authority, which the
Lord gave for building you up and not for destroying you, I will not be
ashamed. 9[†]I do not want to appear to be frightening you with my letters.
10For they say, “His letters are weighty and strong, but z his bodily presence
is weak, and a his speech of no account.” 11Let such a person understand
that what we say by letter when absent, we do when present. 12[†]Not that
we dare to classify or b compare ourselves with some of those who c are
commending themselves. But when they measure themselves by one
another and compare themselves with one another, they are d without
understanding.
13[†]But we will not boast e beyond limits, but will f boast only with
regard to the area of influence God assigned to us, g to reach even to you.
14For we are not overextending ourselves, as though we did not reach you.
h For we were the first to come all the way to you with the gospel of Christ.
15[†]We do not boast beyond limit in the labors of others. But our hope is
that i as your faith increases, our area of influence among you may be
j greatly enlarged, 16so that we may preach the gospel in lands beyond you,
without boasting of work already done in another’s area of influence.
17[†]“Let k the one who boasts, boast in the Lord.” 18For it is l not the one
who commends himself who is approved, but the one m whom the Lord
commends.
Paul and the False Apostles
2 CORINTHIANS 11 I wish you would bear with me in a little foolishness. Do
bear with me! 2[†]For I feel a divine jealousy for you, since n I betrothed
you to one husband, o to present you p as a pure virgin to Christ. 3[†]But I
am afraid that q as the serpent deceived Eve by his cunning, your thoughts
r will be led astray from a s sincere and t pure devotion to Christ. 4[†]For if
someone comes and u proclaims another Jesus than the one we proclaimed,
or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received, or if you
accept v a different gospel from the one you accepted, you put up with it
readily enough. 5[†]Indeed, I consider that w I am not in the least inferior to
these super-apostles. 6 x Even if I am unskilled in speaking, y I am not so in
knowledge; indeed, in every way z we have made this plain to you in all
things.
7[†]Or a did I commit a sin in humbling myself so that you might be
exalted, because b I preached God’s gospel to you free of charge? 8[†]I
robbed other churches by accepting support from them in order to serve
you. 9[†]And when I was with you and was c in need, d I did not burden
anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia e supplied my need. So
I refrained and will refrain f from burdening you in any way.
10
g As the
truth of Christ is in me, this boasting of mine h will not be silenced in the
regions of Achaia. 11And why? i Because I do not love you? j God knows I
do!
12And what I am doing I will continue to do, k in order to undermine the
claim of those who would like to claim that in their boasted mission they
work on the same terms as we do. 13[†]For such men are l false apostles,
m deceitful workmen, n disguising themselves as apostles of Christ. 14And
no wonder, for even Satan disguises himself as o an angel of light. 15[†]So it
is no surprise if his servants, also, disguise themselves as p servants of
righteousness. q Their end will correspond to their deeds.
Paul’s Sufferings as an Apostle
16[†]I repeat, r let no one think me foolish. But even if you do, accept me as
a fool, so that I too may boast a little. 17What I am saying s with this
boastful confidence, t I say not as the Lord would [1] but as a fool. 18Since
u many boast according to the flesh, I too will boast. 19For you gladly bear
with fools, v being wise yourselves! 20[†]For you bear it if someone
w makes slaves of you, or x devours you, or takes advantage of you, or puts
on airs, or y strikes you in the face. 21[†]To my shame, I must say, z we were
too weak for that!
But whatever anyone else dares to boast of—I am speaking as a fool—I
also dare to boast of that. 22Are they Hebrews? a So am I. Are they
Israelites? So am I. Are they offspring of Abraham? So am I. 23Are they
b servants of Christ? c I am a better one—I am talking like a madman—with
far greater labors, d far more imprisonments, e with countless beatings, and
f often near death. 24[†]Five times I received at the hands of the Jews the
g forty lashes less one. 25[†]Three times I was h beaten with rods. i Once I
was stoned. Three times I j was shipwrecked; a night and a day I was adrift
at sea; 26on frequent journeys, in danger from rivers, danger from robbers,
k danger from my own people, l danger from Gentiles, m danger in the city,
danger in the wilderness, danger at sea, danger from false brothers; 27 n in
toil and hardship, through many a sleepless night, o in hunger and thirst,
often without food, [2] in cold and exposure. 28[†]And, apart from other
things, there is the daily pressure on me of my anxiety for p all the
churches. 29
q Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is made to fall, and I
am not indignant?
30[†] r If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness.
31 s The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, t he who is blessed forever,
u knows that I am not lying. 32[†]At Damascus, the governor under King
Aretas v was guarding the city of Damascus in order to seize me, 33 w but I
was let down in a basket through a window in the wall and escaped his
hands.
Paul’s Visions and His Thorn