ACTS 10 [†]At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion of
w what was known as the Italian Cohort, 2[†]a devout man x who feared
God with all his household, gave alms generously to the people, and prayed
continually to God. 3[†] y About the ninth hour of the day [1] z he saw clearly
in a vision a an angel of God come in and say to him, “Cornelius.” 4[†]And
he stared at him in terror and said, “What is it, Lord?” And he said to him,
“Your prayers and your alms b have ascended c as a memorial before God.
5And now send men to Joppa and bring one Simon who is called Peter.
6He
is lodging d with one Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the sea.” 7When
the angel who spoke to him had departed, he called two of his servants and
a devout soldier from among those who attended him, 8and having related
everything to them, he sent them to Joppa.
Peter’s Vision
9[†]The next day, as they were on their journey and approaching the city,
e Peter went up f on the housetop about g the sixth hour [2] to pray.
10And he
became hungry and wanted something to eat, but while they were preparing
it, he fell into h a trance 11and saw i the heavens opened and something like
a great sheet descending, being let down by its four corners upon the earth.
12[†]In it were all kinds of animals and reptiles and birds of the air.
13[†]And there came a voice to him: “Rise, Peter; kill and eat.” 14But Peter
said, “By no means, Lord; j for I have never eaten anything that is
k common or l unclean.” 15And the voice came to him again a second time,
m “What God has made clean, do not call common.” 16This happened three
times, and the thing was taken up at once to heaven.
17Now while Peter was inwardly perplexed as to what n the vision that he
had seen might mean, behold, o the men who were sent by Cornelius,
having made inquiry for Simon’s house, stood at the gate 18and called out to
ask whether Simon who was called Peter was lodging there. 19And while
Peter was pondering n the vision, p the Spirit said to him, “Behold, three
men are looking for you. 20Rise and go down and q accompany them
without hesitation, [3] for I have sent them.” 21And Peter went down to the
men and said, “I am the one you are looking for. What is the reason for your
coming?” 22And they said, “Cornelius, a centurion, an upright and r God-
fearing man, who is well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, was
directed by s a holy angel to send for you to come to his house and t to hear
what you have to say.” 23So he invited them in to be his guests.
The next day he rose and went away with them, and u some of v the
brothers from Joppa accompanied him. 24And on the following day they
entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his
relatives and close friends. 25When Peter entered, Cornelius met him and
w fell down at his feet and x worshiped him. 26But Peter lifted him up,
saying, y “Stand up; I too am a man.” 27And as he talked with him, he went
in and found many persons gathered. 28[†]And he said to them, “You
yourselves know how unlawful it is for a Jew z to associate with or to visit
anyone of another nation, but a God has shown me that I should not call any
person common or unclean. 29So when I was sent for, I came without
objection. I ask then why you sent for me.”
30And Cornelius said, b “Four days ago, about this hour, I was praying in
my house at c the ninth hour, [4] and behold, d a man stood before me in
bright clothing 31and said, ‘Cornelius, e your prayer has been heard and
your alms have been remembered before God. 32Send therefore to Joppa
and ask for Simon who is called Peter. He is lodging in the house of Simon,
a tanner, by the sea.’ 33So I sent for you at once, and you have been kind
enough to come. Now therefore we are all here in the presence of God to
hear all that you have been commanded by the Lord.”
Gentiles Hear the Good News
34[†]So Peter opened his mouth and said: “Truly I understand that f God
g shows no partiality,
35[†]but f in every nation anyone who fears him and
h does what is right is acceptable to him. 36[†]As for i the word that he sent
to Israel, j preaching good news of k peace through Jesus Christ ( l he is
Lord of all), 37you yourselves know what happened throughout all Judea,
m beginning n from Galilee after the baptism that John proclaimed: 38how
o God anointed Jesus of Nazareth p with the Holy Spirit and with q power.
He went about doing good and healing all r who were oppressed by the
devil, s for God was with him. 39[†]And t we are witnesses of all that he did
both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem. u They put him to death
by hanging him on a tree, 40but v God raised him on w the third day and
made him to x appear,
41[†] y not to all the people but to us who had been
chosen by God as z witnesses, who ate and drank with him after he rose
from the dead. 42And a he commanded us to preach to the people and to
testify b that he is the one appointed by God to be judge c of the living and
the dead. 43[†] d To him e all the prophets bear witness that f everyone who
believes in him receives g forgiveness of sins h through his name.”
The Holy Spirit Falls on the Gentiles
44[†]While Peter was still saying these things, i the Holy Spirit fell on all
who heard the word. 45And the believers from among j the circumcised who
had come with Peter were amazed, because k the gift of the Holy Spirit
l was poured out even on the Gentiles. 46For they were hearing them
m speaking in tongues and extolling God. Then Peter declared, 47[†] n “Can
anyone withhold water for baptizing these people, who have received the
Holy Spirit o just as we have?” 48[†]And he p commanded them q to be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to remain for
some days.
Peter Reports to the Church
ACTS 11 Now the apostles and r the brothers [1] who were throughout Judea
heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God. 2[†]So when
Peter went up to Jerusalem, s the circumcision party [2] criticized him,
saying, 3[†] t “You went to uncircumcised men and u ate with them.” 4But
Peter began and explained it to them in order: 5
v “I was in the city of Joppa
praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, something like a great sheet
descending, being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came
down to me. 6Looking at it closely, I observed animals and beasts of prey
and reptiles and birds of the air.
7And I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Rise,
Peter; kill and eat.’ 8But I said, ‘By no means, Lord; for nothing common or
unclean has ever entered my mouth.’ 9But the voice answered a second time
from heaven, ‘What God has made clean, do not call common.’ 10This
happened three times, and all was drawn up again into heaven. 11And
behold, at that very moment three men arrived at the house in which we
were, sent to me from Caesarea. 12[†]And the Spirit told me to go with
them, w making no distinction. x These six brothers also accompanied me,
and we entered the man’s house. 13And he told us how he had seen the
angel stand in his house and say, ‘Send to Joppa and bring Simon who is
called Peter; 14 y he will declare to you a message by which z you will be
saved, you and all your household.’ 15[†]As I began to speak, a the Holy
Spirit fell on them b just as on us at the beginning. 16And I remembered the
word of the Lord, how he said, c ‘John baptized with water, but you will be
baptized with the Holy Spirit.’ 17If then d God gave e the same gift to them
as he gave to us f when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, g who was I
h that I could stand in God’s way?” 18[†]When they heard these things they
fell silent. And they i glorified God, saying, j “Then to the Gentiles also
God has k granted l repentance that leads to life.”
The Church in Antioch
19[†] m Now those who were scattered because of the persecution that arose
over Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking
the word to no one except Jews. 20[†]But there were some of them, men of
Cyprus and Cyrene, who on coming to Antioch spoke to the Hellenists [3]
also, n preaching the Lord Jesus. 21And o the hand of the Lord was with
them, and a great number who believed p turned to the Lord. 22[†]The
report of this came to the ears of the church in Jerusalem, and they sent
Barnabas to Antioch. 23When he came and saw q the grace of God, he was
glad, and he exhorted them all to remain faithful to the Lord r with steadfast
purpose, 24for he was a good man, s full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And
a great many people t were added to the Lord. 25[†]So Barnabas went to
u Tarsus to look for Saul, 26and when he had found him, he brought him to
Antioch. For a whole year they met with the church and taught a great many
people. And in Antioch the disciples were first called v Christians.
27[†]Now in these days w prophets came down from Jerusalem to
Antioch. 28[†]And one of them named x Agabus stood up and foretold y by
the Spirit that there would be a great z famine over all the world (this took
place in the days of a Claudius). 29So the disciples determined, every one
according to his ability, b to send relief to c the brothers [4] living in Judea.
30[†] d And they did so, sending it to e the elders by the hand of Barnabas
and Saul.
James Killed and Peter Imprisoned