ACTS 15 [†] y But some men came down from Judea and were teaching z the
brothers, “Unless you are a circumcised b according to the custom of
Moses, you cannot be saved.” 2And after Paul and Barnabas had no small
dissension and c debate with them, Paul and Barnabas and d some of the
others were appointed to go up to Jerusalem to e the apostles and the elders
about this question. 3So, f being sent on their way by the church, they
passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, g describing in detail the
conversion of the Gentiles, and h brought great joy to all i the brothers. [1]
4
j When they came to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and
k the apostles and the elders, and g they declared all that God had done with
them. 5[†]But some believers who belonged to l the party of the Pharisees
rose up and said, m “It is necessary n to circumcise them and to order them
to keep the law of Moses.”
6[†] o The k apostles and the elders were gathered together to consider this
matter.
7[†]And after there had been much p debate, Peter stood up and said
to them, “Brothers, you know that in the early days God made a choice
among you, q that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear r the word of s the
gospel and believe. 8And God, t who knows the heart, u bore witness to
them, v by giving them the Holy Spirit just as he did to us, 9[†]and w he
made no distinction between us and them, x having cleansed their hearts
y by faith. 10[†]Now, therefore, why z are you putting God to the test a by
placing a yoke on the neck of the disciples b that neither our fathers nor we
have been able to bear? 11But we c believe that we will be d saved through
e the grace of the Lord Jesus, w just as they will.”
12[†]And all the assembly fell silent, and they listened to Barnabas and
Paul f as they related what signs and wonders God had done through them
among the Gentiles. 13After they finished speaking, g James replied,
“Brothers, listen to me. 14[†] h Simeon has related how God first visited the
Gentiles, to take from them i a people for his name. 15And with this the
words of the prophets agree, just as it is written,
16[†] j “‘After this I will return,
and I will rebuild the tent of David that has fallen;
I will rebuild its ruins,
and I will restore it,
17 that the remnant [2] of mankind k may seek the Lord,
and all the Gentiles l who are called by my name,
says the Lord, who makes these things 18
m known from of old.’
19[†]Therefore n my judgment is that we should not trouble those of the
Gentiles who o turn to God, 20but should write to them p to abstain from
q the things polluted by idols, and from r sexual immorality, and from
s what has been strangled, and from s blood. 21For from ancient generations
Moses has had in every city those who proclaim him, t for he is read every
Sabbath in the synagogues.”
The Council’s Letter to Gentile Believers
22[†]Then it seemed good to u the apostles and the elders, with the whole
church, to choose men from among them and send them to Antioch with
Paul and Barnabas. They sent Judas called v Barsabbas, and w Silas, leading
men among x the brothers, 23[†]with the following letter: x “The brothers,
both u the apostles and the elders, to the brothers [3] who are of the Gentiles
in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, y greetings. 24[†]Since we have heard that
z some persons have gone out from us and a troubled you [4] with words,
unsettling your minds, although we gave them no instructions, 25it has
seemed good to us, having come b to one accord, to choose men and send
them to you with our c beloved Barnabas and Paul, 26 d men who have
e risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 27We have
therefore sent f Judas and Silas, who themselves will tell you the same
things by word of mouth. 28[†]For it has seemed good g to the Holy Spirit
and h to us i to lay on you no greater burden than these requirements:
29
j that you abstain from k what has been sacrificed to idols, and from
blood, and from what has been strangled, and from sexual immorality. If
you keep yourselves from these, you will do well. Farewell.”
30So when they were sent off, they went down to Antioch, and having
gathered the congregation together, they delivered the letter.
31And when
they had read it, they rejoiced because of its encouragement. 32[†]And
Judas and Silas, who were themselves l prophets, encouraged and
m strengthened n the brothers with many words. 33[†]And after they had
spent some time, they were sent off o in peace by n the brothers to those
who had sent them. [5] 35But p Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch,
teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.
Paul and Barnabas Separate
36[†]And after some days Paul said to Barnabas, “Let us return and visit
n the brothers q in every city where we proclaimed the word of the Lord,
and see how they are.” 37[†]Now Barnabas wanted to take with them r John
called Mark. 38But Paul thought best not to take with them one s who had
withdrawn from them in Pamphylia and had not gone with them to the
work. 39[†]And there arose t a sharp disagreement, so that they separated
from each other. u Barnabas took Mark with him and sailed away to Cyprus,
40but Paul chose Silas and departed, v having been commended by w the
brothers to x the grace of the Lord. 41[†]And he went through Syria and
Cilicia, y strengthening the churches.
Timothy Joins Paul and Silas