ACTS 4 [†]And as they were speaking to the people, the priests and l the
captain of the temple and m the Sadducees came upon them, 2[†]greatly
annoyed because they were teaching the people and proclaiming n in Jesus
the resurrection from the dead. 3[†]And they arrested them and o put them
in custody until the next day, for it was already evening. 4[†]But many of
those who had heard the word believed, and p the number of the men came
to about five thousand.
5[†]On the next day their rulers and elders and scribes gathered together
in Jerusalem, 6[†]with q Annas the high priest and r Caiaphas and John and
Alexander, and all who were of the high-priestly family.
7And when they
had set them in the midst, they inquired, s “By what power or t by what
name did you do this?” 8[†]Then Peter, u filled with the Holy Spirit, said to
them, “Rulers of the people and elders, 9if we are being examined today
v concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what means this man
has been healed, 10[†]let it be known to all of you and to all the people of
Israel that w by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified,
x whom God raised from the dead—by him this man is standing before you
well. 11[†] y This Jesus [1] is the stone that was z rejected by you, the
builders, which has become the cornerstone. [2] 12[†]And there is a salvation
b in no one else, for c there is no other d name under heaven given among
men [3] by which we must be saved.”
13[†] e Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived
that they were uneducated, common men, they were astonished. And they
recognized that they had been with Jesus. 14But seeing the man who was
healed f standing beside them, g they had nothing to say in opposition. 15But
when they had commanded them to leave the council, they conferred with
one another,
16saying, h “What shall we do with these men? For that i a
notable sign has been performed through them is evident to all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. 17But in order that it may
spread no further among the people, let us warn them j to speak no more to
anyone in this name.” 18[†]So they called them and charged them not to
speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus. 19But Peter and John answered
them, k “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to
God, you must judge, 20for l we cannot but speak of what m we have seen
and heard.” 21And when they had further threatened them, they let them go,
finding no way to punish them, n because of the people, for all were
praising God o for what had happened. 22For the man on whom this sign of
healing was performed was more than forty years old.
The Believers Pray for Boldness
23When they were released, they went to their friends and reported what the
chief priests and the elders had said to them. 24[†]And when they heard it,
they lifted their voices p together to God and said, “Sovereign Lord, q who
made the heaven and the earth and the sea and everything in them, 25who
through the mouth of our father David, your servant, [4] said by the Holy
Spirit,
r “‘Why did the Gentiles rage,
and the peoples plot in vain?
26 The kings of the earth set themselves,
and s the rulers were gathered together,
against the Lord and against his t Anointed’ [5]—
27[†]for truly in this city there were gathered together against your u holy
servant Jesus, v whom you anointed, both w Herod and x Pontius Pilate,
along y with the Gentiles and z the peoples of Israel, 28
a to do whatever your
hand and b your plan had predestined to take place. 29[†]And now, Lord,
c look upon their threats and grant to your servants [6] to continue to speak
your word with all d boldness, 30while e you stretch out your hand to heal,
and signs and wonders are performed f through the name of your g holy
servant Jesus.” 31[†]And when they had prayed, h the place in which they
were gathered together was shaken, and i they were all filled with the Holy
Spirit and j continued to speak the word of God with boldness.
They Had Everything in Common
32[†]Now the full number of those who believed were of k one heart and
l soul, and no one said that any of the things that belonged to him was his
own, but m they had everything in common. 33And with great n power the
apostles were giving their testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus,
and o great grace was upon them all. 34[†] p There was not a needy person
among them, for q as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them
and brought the proceeds of what was sold 35and r laid it at the apostles’
feet, and s it was distributed to each as any had need. 36[†]Thus Joseph, who
was also called by the apostles Barnabas (which means t son of
encouragement), a Levite, a native of Cyprus, 37sold a field that belonged to
him and brought the money and u laid it at the apostles’ feet.
Ananias and Sapphira
ACTS 5 But a man named Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of
property,
2[†]and with his wife’s knowledge v he kept back for himself
some of the proceeds and brought only a part of it and w laid it at the
apostles’ feet. 3[†]But Peter said, “Ananias, why has x Satan filled your
heart to lie y to the Holy Spirit and z to keep back for yourself part of the
proceeds of the land? 4[†]While it remained unsold, did it not remain your
own? And after it was sold, was it not at your disposal? Why is it that you
have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to man but a to
God.” 5[†]When Ananias heard these words, he b fell down and breathed his
last. And c great fear came upon all who heard of it. 6The young men rose
and d wrapped him up and carried him out and buried him.
7After an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing
what had happened. 8And Peter said to her, “Tell me whether you [1] sold
the land for so much.” And she said, “Yes, for so much.” 9[†]But Peter said
to her, “How is it that you have agreed together e to test f the Spirit of the
Lord? Behold, the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the
door, and they will carry you out.” 10[†]Immediately she fell down at his
feet and breathed her last. When the young men came in they found her
dead, and they carried her out and buried her beside her husband. 11And
g great fear came upon the whole church and upon all who heard of these
things.
Many Signs and Wonders Done
12[†]Now many signs and wonders were regularly done among the people
h by the hands of the apostles. And they were all i together in j Solomon’s
Portico. 13[†]None of the rest dared join them, but k the people held them in
high esteem. 14And l more than ever believers were added to the Lord,
multitudes of both men and women, 15[†] m so that they even n carried out
the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mats, that as Peter came
by o at least his shadow might fall on some of them. 16The people also
gathered from the towns around Jerusalem, p bringing the sick and those
afflicted with unclean spirits, and they were all healed.
The Apostles Arrested and Freed
17[†]But the high priest rose up, and all who were with him (that is, the
party of q the Sadducees), and filled with r jealousy 18they arrested the
apostles and s put them in the public prison. 19But during the night t an
angel of the Lord u opened the prison doors and brought them out, and said,
20[†]“Go and stand in the temple and speak to the people all v the words of
w this x Life.” 21[†]And when they heard this, y they entered the temple z at
daybreak and began to teach.
Now when the high priest came, and those who were with him, they
called together the council, all the senate of the people of Israel, and sent to
the prison to have them brought. 22But when the officers came, they did not
find them in the prison, so they returned and reported, 23“We found the
prison securely locked and the guards standing at the doors, but when we
opened them we found no one inside.” 24Now when a the captain of the
temple and the chief priests heard these words, they were greatly perplexed
about them, wondering what this would come to. 25And someone came and
told them, “Look! The men whom you put in prison b are standing in the
temple and teaching the people.” 26Then c the captain with the officers went
and brought them, but not by force, for d they were afraid of being stoned
by the people.
27And when they had brought them, they set them before the council.
And the high priest questioned them, 28saying, e “We strictly charged you
not to teach in this name, yet here you have filled Jerusalem with your
teaching, and you f intend to bring this man’s blood upon us.” 29But Peter
and the apostles answered, g “We must obey God rather than men.
30[†] h The God of our fathers i raised Jesus, j whom you killed by hanging
him on k a tree. 31God exalted l him at his right hand as m Leader and
n Savior, o to give p repentance to Israel and o forgiveness of sins. 32And
q we are witnesses to these things, and r so is the Holy Spirit, s whom God
has given to those who obey him.”
33When they heard this, they t were enraged and wanted to kill them.
34[†]But a Pharisee in the council named u Gamaliel, v a teacher of the law
held in honor by all the people, stood up and gave orders to put the men
outside for a little while. 35And he said to them, “Men of Israel, take care
what you are about to do with these men. 36[†]For w before these days
Theudas rose up, x claiming to be somebody, and a number of men, about
four hundred, joined him. He was killed, and all who followed him were
dispersed and came to nothing. 37After him Judas the Galilean rose up in
the days of y the census and drew away some of the people after him. He
too perished, and all who followed him were scattered. 38So in the present
case I tell you, keep away from these men and let them alone, for z if this
plan or this undertaking is of man, it will fail; 39but a if it is of God, you
will not be able to overthrow them. You b might even be found opposing
God!” So they took his advice, 40[†]and c when they had called in the
apostles, d they beat them and charged them not to speak in the name of
Jesus, and let them go. 41Then they left the presence of the council,
e rejoicing that they were counted worthy f to suffer dishonor for g the
name. 42And every day, h in the temple and from house to house, they did
not cease teaching and i preaching j that the Christ is Jesus.
Seven Chosen to Serve