ACTS 24 [†]And s after five days the high priest t Ananias came down with
some elders and a spokesman, one Tertullus. They laid before u the
governor their case against Paul. 2[†]And when he had been summoned,
Tertullus began to accuse him, saying:
“Since through you we enjoy much peace, and since by your foresight,
v most excellent Felix, reforms are being made for this nation, 3in every
way and everywhere we accept this with all gratitude. 4But, to detain [1] you
no further, I beg you in your kindness to hear us briefly.
5[†]For we have
found this man a plague, w one who stirs up riots among all the Jews
throughout the world and is a ringleader of x the sect of the Nazarenes.
6 y He even tried to profane the temple, but we seized him. [2] 8By examining
him yourself you will be able to find out from him about everything of
which we accuse him.”
9The Jews also joined in the charge, affirming that all these things were
so.
10[†]And when the governor had nodded to him to speak, Paul replied:
“Knowing that for many years you have been a judge over this nation, I
cheerfully make my defense. 11[†]You can verify that z it is not more than
twelve days since I a went up b to worship in Jerusalem, 12and c they did
not find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the
temple or in the synagogues or in the city.
13
d Neither can they prove to you
what they now bring up against me. 14[†]But this I confess to you, that
according to e the Way, which they call f a sect, g I worship h the God of our
fathers, believing everything i laid down by the Law and written in the
Prophets, 15 j having k a hope in God, which these men themselves accept,
that there will be l a resurrection m of both the just and the unjust. 16So I
always n take pains to have a o clear conscience toward both God and man.
17Now p after several years q I came to bring alms to r my nation and to
present s offerings. 18[†]While I was doing this, they found me t purified in
the temple, without any crowd or tumult. But u some Jews from Asia—
19 v they ought to be here before you and to make an accusation, should they
have anything against me. 20[†]Or else let these men themselves say what
wrongdoing they found when I stood before the council, 21other than this
one thing w that I cried out while standing among them: ‘It is with respect to
the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial before you this day.’”
Paul Kept in Custody
22[†]But Felix, having a rather accurate knowledge of x the Way, put them
off, saying, “When Lysias the tribune comes down, I will decide your case.”
23Then he gave orders to the centurion that he y should be kept in custody
but have some liberty, and that z none of his friends should be prevented
from attending to his needs.
24[†]After some days Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish,
and he sent for Paul and heard him speak about a faith b in Christ Jesus.
25And as he reasoned c about righteousness and self-control and the coming
judgment, Felix was alarmed and said, “Go away for the present. d When I
get an opportunity I will summon you.” 26[†]At the same time he hoped
e that money would be given him by Paul. So he sent for him often and
conversed with him. 27[†]When two years had elapsed, Felix was succeeded
by Porcius f Festus. And g desiring to do the Jews a favor, h Felix left Paul
in prison.
Paul Appeals to Caesar
ACTS 25 Now three days after Festus had arrived in i the province, he went
up to Jerusalem from Caesarea. 2[†]And the chief priests and the principal
men of the Jews j laid out their case against Paul, and they urged him,
3asking as a favor against Paul [1] that he summon him to Jerusalem—
because k they were planning an ambush to kill him on the way.
4[†]Festus
replied that Paul was being kept at Caesarea and that he himself intended to
go there shortly.
5“So,” said he, “let the men of authority among you go
down with me, and if there is anything wrong about the man, let them bring
charges against him.”
6After he stayed among them not more than eight or ten days, he went
down to Caesarea. And the next day he took his seat on l the tribunal and
ordered Paul to be brought. 7When he had arrived, the Jews who had come
down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many and serious charges
against him m that they could not prove. 8Paul argued in his defense,
“Neither n against o the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor
p against Caesar have I committed any offense.” 9[†]But Festus, q wishing
to do the Jews a favor, said to Paul, “Do you wish to go up to Jerusalem and
there be tried on these charges before me?” 10But Paul said, “I am standing
before Caesar’s r tribunal, where I ought to be tried. To the Jews I have
done no wrong, as you yourself know very well. 11If then I am a wrongdoer
and have committed anything for which I deserve to die, I do not seek to
escape death. But if there is nothing to their charges against me, no one can
give me up to them. s I appeal to Caesar.” 12[†]Then Festus, when he had
conferred with his council, answered, “To Caesar you have appealed; to
Caesar you shall go.”
Paul Before Agrippa and Bernice
13[†]Now when some days had passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice
arrived at Caesarea and greeted Festus. 14And as they stayed there many
days, Festus laid Paul’s case before the king, saying, t “There is a man left
prisoner by Felix, 15and when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the
elders of the Jews laid out their case u against him, asking for a sentence of
condemnation against him. 16 v I answered them that it was not the custom
of the Romans to give up anyone w before the accused met the accusers face
to face and had opportunity to make his defense concerning the charge laid
against him. 17
x So when they came together here, I made no delay, but on
the next day took my seat on y the tribunal and ordered the man to be
brought. 18[†]When the accusers stood up, they brought no charge in his
case of such evils as I supposed. 19Rather they z had certain points of
dispute with him about their own religion and about a a certain Jesus, who
was dead, but whom Paul asserted to be alive. 20Being at a loss how to
investigate these questions, I b asked whether he wanted to go to Jerusalem
and be tried there regarding them. 21But c when Paul had appealed to be
kept in custody for the decision of d the emperor, I ordered him to be held
until I could send him to Caesar.” 22Then e Agrippa said to Festus, “I would
like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” said he, “you will hear him.”
23[†]So on the next day f Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp,
and they entered the audience hall with the military tribunes and the
prominent men of the city. Then, at the command of Festus, Paul was
brought in. 24And Festus said, “King Agrippa and all who are present with
us, you see this man about whom g the whole Jewish people petitioned me,
both in Jerusalem and here, h shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
25But I found that i he had done nothing deserving death. And j as he
himself appealed to k the emperor, I decided to go ahead and send him.
26But I have nothing definite to write to my lord about him. Therefore I
have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa,
so that, after we have examined him, I may have something to write. 27For
it seems to me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to indicate the
charges against him.”
Paul’s Defense Before Agrippa
ACTS 26 So l Agrippa said to Paul, “You have permission to speak for
yourself.” Then Paul stretched out his hand and made his defense:
2“I consider myself fortunate that it is before you, King Agrippa, I am
going to make my defense today m against all the accusations of the Jews,
3especially because you are familiar with all the n customs and
o controversies of the Jews. Therefore I beg you to listen to me patiently.
4 p “My manner of life from my youth, spent from the beginning among
q my own nation and in Jerusalem, is known by all the Jews. 5They have
known for a long time, if they are willing to testify, that r according to the
strictest s party of our t religion I have lived as u a Pharisee. 6And now I
stand here on trial because of my hope in v the promise made by God to our
fathers, 7
w to which x our twelve tribes hope to y attain, as they earnestly
worship night and day. And for this hope z I am accused by Jews, O king!
8Why is it thought a incredible by any of you that God raises the dead?
9
b “I myself was convinced that I ought to do many things in opposing
the name of c Jesus of Nazareth. 10 d And I did so in Jerusalem. I not only
locked up many of the saints in prison after receiving authority e from the
chief priests, but f when they were put to death I cast my vote against them.
11And g I punished them often in all the synagogues and tried to make them
h blaspheme, and i in raging fury against them I j persecuted them even to
foreign cities.
Paul Tells of His Conversion
12“In this connection k I journeyed to Damascus with the authority and
commission of the chief priests. 13At midday, O king, I saw on the way a
light from heaven, brighter than the sun, that shone around me and those
who journeyed with me. 14[†]And when we had all fallen to the ground, I
heard a voice saying to me l in the Hebrew language, [1] ‘Saul, Saul, why
are you persecuting me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.’ 15And
I said, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said, ‘I am Jesus whom you are
persecuting. 16But rise and m stand upon your feet, for I have appeared to
you for this purpose, n to appoint you as a servant and witness to the things
in which you have seen me and to those in which I will appear to you,
17 o delivering you from your people and from the Gentiles— p to whom I
q am sending you 18
r to open their eyes, so that they may turn from
darkness to light and from s the power of Satan to God, that they may
receive t forgiveness of sins and u a place among those who are sanctified
v by faith in me.’
19“Therefore, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to w the heavenly
vision, 20[†]but declared first x to those in Damascus, y then in Jerusalem
and throughout all the region of Judea, and also z to the Gentiles, that they
should a repent and b turn to God, performing deeds c in keeping with their
repentance. 21For this reason d the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to
kill me. 22[†] e To this day I have had the help that comes from God, and so
f I stand here testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what
g the prophets and Moses said would come to pass: 23 h that the Christ i must
suffer and that, j by being the first k to rise from the dead, l he would
proclaim m light both to our people and to the Gentiles.”
24And as he was saying these things in his defense, Festus said with a
loud voice, “Paul, n you are out of your mind; your great learning is driving
you out of your mind.” 25But Paul said, “I am not out of my mind, o most
excellent Festus, but I am speaking p true and q rational words. 26For r the
king knows about these things, and to him I speak boldly. For I am
persuaded that none of these things has escaped his notice, for this has not
been done in a corner.
27[†]King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I
know that you believe.” 28[†]And Agrippa said to Paul, “In a short time
would you persuade me to be s a Christian?” [2] 29And Paul said, “Whether
short or long, I would to God that not only you but also all who hear me this
day t might become such as I am—except for u these chains.”
30Then the king rose, and v the governor and Bernice and those who were
sitting with them. 31And when they had withdrawn, they said to one
another, w “This man is doing nothing to deserve death or imprisonment.”
32And Agrippa said to Festus, x “This man could have been set y free if he
had not appealed z to Caesar.”
Paul Sails for Rome