HEBREWS 7 [†]For this q Melchizedek, king of r Salem, priest of s the Most
High God, met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and
blessed him, 2and to him Abraham apportioned a tenth part of everything.
He is first, by translation of his name, king of righteousness, and then he is
also king of Salem, that is, king of peace. 3[†]He is without father or mother
t or genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but
resembling the Son of God he continues a priest forever.
4[†]See how great this man was to whom Abraham u the patriarch gave a
tenth of the spoils! 5[†]And v those descendants of Levi who receive the
priestly office have a commandment in the law to take tithes from the
people, that is, from their brothers, [1] though these also are descended from
Abraham. 6But this man w who does not have his descent from them
received tithes from Abraham and blessed x him who had the promises.
7[†]It is beyond dispute that the inferior is blessed by the superior.
8[†]In the
one case tithes are received by mortal men, but in the other case, by one y of
whom it is testified that z he lives. 9[†]One might even say that Levi
himself, who receives tithes, paid tithes through Abraham, 10for he was still
in the loins of his ancestor when Melchizedek met him.
Jesus Compared to Melchizedek
11[†] a Now if perfection had been attainable through the Levitical
priesthood (for under it the people received the law), what further need
would there have been for another priest to arise after the order of
Melchizedek, rather than one named after the order of Aaron? 12For when
there is a change in the priesthood, there is necessarily a change in the law
as well. 13[†]For the one of whom these things are spoken belonged to
another tribe, from which no one has ever served at the altar.
14For it is
evident that our Lord was descended b from Judah, and in connection with
that tribe Moses said nothing about priests.
15[†]This becomes even more evident when another priest arises in the
likeness of Melchizedek, 16who has become a priest, not on the basis of a
legal requirement concerning bodily descent, but by the power of an
indestructible life. 17For it is witnessed of him,
c “You are a priest forever,
after the order of Melchizedek.”
18[†]For on the one hand, a former commandment is set aside d because of
its weakness and uselessness 19(for e the law made nothing perfect); but on
the other hand, f a better hope is introduced, through which g we draw near
to God.
20[†]And it was not without an oath. For those who formerly became
priests were made such without an oath, 21but this one was made a priest
with an oath by the one who said to him:
h “The Lord has sworn
and will not change his mind,
‘You are a priest forever.’”
22This makes Jesus the guarantor of i a better covenant.
23[†]The former priests were many in number, because they were
prevented by death from continuing in office, 24but he holds his priesthood
permanently, because he continues j forever.
25Consequently, he is able to
save to the uttermost [2] k those who draw near to God l through him, since
he always lives m to make intercession for them.
26[†]For it was indeed fitting that we should have such a high priest,
n holy, innocent, unstained, o separated from sinners, and p exalted above
the heavens. 27He has no need, like those high priests, to offer sacrifices
daily, q first for his own sins and then for those of the people, since he did
this r once for all when he offered up himself. 28[†]For the law appoints
men s in their weakness as high priests, but the word of the oath, which
came later than the law, appoints a Son who has been made t perfect
forever.
Jesus, High Priest of a Better Covenant