JOHN 15 [†]“I am the r true vine, and my Father is s the vinedresser.
2[†] t Every branch in me that does not bear fruit u he takes away, and every
branch that does bear fruit he prunes, v that it may bear more fruit.
3[†]Already w you are clean x because of the word that I have spoken to
you. 4[†] y Abide z in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit by
itself, unless it abides in the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in me.
5[†]I am the vine; a you are the branches. Whoever abides in me and I in
him, he it is that b bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing.
6[†]If anyone does not abide in me c he is thrown away like a branch and
withers; d and the branches are gathered, thrown into the fire, and burned.
7[†]If e you abide in me, and my words abide in you, f ask whatever you
wish, and it will be done for you. 8 g By this my Father is glorified, that you
h bear much fruit and so prove to be my disciples. 9
i As the Father has loved
me, j so have I loved you. Abide in my love. 10[†] k If you keep my
commandments, you will abide in my love, just as l I have kept m my
Father’s commandments and abide in his love. 11These things I have spoken
to you, n that my joy may be in you, and that o your joy may be full.
12[†] p “This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have
loved you. 13[†] q Greater love has no one than this, r that someone lay
down his life for his friends. 14You are s my friends t if you do what I
command you. 15 u No longer do I call you servants, [1] for the servant [2]
w does not know what his master is doing; but I have called you friends, for
x all that I have heard from my Father y I have made known to you.
16[†]You did not choose me, but z I chose you and appointed you that you
should go and a bear fruit and that your fruit should abide, so that
b whatever you ask the Father in my name, he may give it to you. 17These
things I command you, c so that you will love one another.
The Hatred of the World
18 d “If the world hates you, know that it has hated me before it hated you.
19 e If you were of the world, the world would love you as its own; but
because f you are not of the world, but I chose you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. 20Remember the word that I said to you: g ‘A
servant is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, h they will
also persecute you. i If they kept my word, they will also keep yours. 21But
j all these things they will do to you k on account of my name, l because
they do not know him who sent me. 22[†]If I had not come and spoken to
them, m they would not have been guilty of sin, [3] but now they have no
excuse for their sin. 23 n Whoever hates me hates my Father also. 24 o If I had
not done among them the works that no one else did, m they would not be
guilty of sin, but now they have p seen and hated both me and my Father.
25[†]But q the word that is written in their Law must be fulfilled: r ‘They
hated me without a cause.’
26[†]“But s when the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the
Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, t he will bear
witness about me. 27And u you also will bear witness, v because you have
been with me w from the beginning.
JOHN 16 “I have said all these things to you to keep you from falling
away.
2[†] x They will put you out of the synagogues. Indeed, y the hour is
coming when z whoever kills you will think he is offering service to God.
3And they will do these things a because they have not known the Father,
nor me. 4But b I have said these things to you, that when c their hour comes
you may remember that I told them to you.
The Work of the Holy Spirit
“I did not say these things to you from the beginning, d because I was with
you. 5[†]But now e I am going to him who sent me, and f none of you asks
me, ‘Where are you going?’ 6But because I have said these things to you,
g sorrow has filled your heart. 7[†]Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is to
your advantage that I go away, for h if I do not go away, i the Helper will
not come to you. But j if k I go, l I will send him to you. 8 m And when he
comes, he will n convict the world concerning sin and righteousness and
judgment: 9concerning sin, o because they do not believe in me;
10[†] p concerning righteousness, q because I go to the Father, and you will
see me no longer; 11[†] r concerning judgment, because the ruler of this
world s is judged.
12“I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.
13[†]When t the Spirit of truth comes, u he will v guide you into all the truth,
for he will not speak on his own authority, but w whatever he hears he will
speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. 14He will
x glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you. 15 y All that
the Father has is mine; z therefore I said that he will take what is mine and
declare it to you.
Your Sorrow Will Turn into Joy
16[†] a “A little while, and you will see me no longer; and b again a little
while, and you will see me.” 17So c some of his disciples said to one
another, “What is this that he says to us, d ‘A little while, and you will not
see me, and again a little while, and you will see me’; and, e ‘because I am
going to the Father’?” 18So they were saying, “What does he mean by ‘a
little while’? f We do not know what he is talking about.” 19 g Jesus knew
that they wanted to ask him, so he said to them, “Is this what you are asking
yourselves, what I meant by saying, ‘A little while and you will not see me,
and again a little while and you will see me’? 20Truly, truly, I say to you,
h you will weep and lament, but i the world will rejoice. You will be
sorrowful, but j your sorrow will turn into joy.
21 k When a woman is giving
birth, she has sorrow because her hour has come, but when she has
delivered the baby, she no longer remembers the anguish, for joy that a
human being has been born into the world. 22 l So also you have sorrow
now, but m I will see you again, and n your hearts will rejoice, and no one
will take your joy from you. 23[†] o In that day you will p ask nothing of me.
Truly, truly, I say to you, q whatever you ask of the Father in my name, r he
will give it to you. 24[†]Until now you have asked nothing in my name.
s Ask, and you will receive, t that your joy may be full.
I Have Overcome the World
25[†]“I have said these things to you in figures of speech. u The hour is
coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures of speech but will tell
you plainly about the Father.
26In that day you will ask in my name, and I
do not say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf; 27 v for the Father
himself loves you, because w you have loved me and x have believed that I
came from God. [1] 28[†] y I came from the Father and have come into the
world, and now z I am leaving the world and going to the Father.”
29His disciples said, “Ah, now you are speaking plainly and not a using
figurative speech! 30Now we know that b you know all things and do not
need anyone to question you; this is why we believe that c you came from
God.” 31Jesus answered them, “Do you now believe? 32[†]Behold, d the
hour is coming, indeed it has come, when e you will be scattered, each to
his own home, and f will leave me alone. g Yet I am not alone, for the
Father is with me. 33I have said these things to you, that h in me you may
have peace. i In the world you will have j tribulation. But k take heart; l I
have overcome the world.”
The High Priestly Prayer