LUKE 13 [†]There were some present at that very time who told him about
the Galileans whose blood p Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. 2And
he answered them, q “Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners
than all the other Galileans, because they suffered in this way? 3No, I tell
you; but unless you r repent, you will all likewise perish. 4Or those eighteen
on whom the tower in s Siloam fell and killed them: do you think that they
were worse offenders than all the others who lived in Jerusalem? 5No, I tell
you; but unless you r repent, you will all likewise perish.”
The Parable of the Barren Fig Tree
6[†]And he told this parable: “A man had t a fig tree planted in his vineyard,
and he came seeking fruit on it and found none. 7And he said to the
vinedresser, ‘Look, for three years now I have come seeking fruit on this fig
tree, and I find none. u Cut it down. Why should it use up the ground?’
8And he answered him, ‘Sir, let it alone this year also, until I dig around it
and put on manure. 9Then if it should bear fruit next year, well and good;
but if not, you can cut it down.’”
A Woman with a Disabling Spirit
10Now v he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath. 11[†]And
behold, there was a woman who had had w a disabling spirit for eighteen
years. She was bent over and could not fully straighten herself. 12When
Jesus saw her, he called her over and said to her, “Woman, you are freed
from your disability.” 13And he x laid his hands on her, and immediately she
was made straight, and she y glorified God. 14[†]But z the ruler of the
synagogue, indignant because Jesus a had healed on the Sabbath, said to the
people, b “There are six days in which work ought to be done. Come on
those days and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day.” 15[†]Then the Lord
answered him, “You hypocrites! c Does not each of you on the Sabbath
untie his ox or his donkey from the manger and lead it away to water it?
16And ought not this woman, d a daughter of Abraham whom e Satan bound
for eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day?” 17As he
said these things, f all his adversaries were put to shame, and g all the
people rejoiced at all the glorious things that were done by him.
The Mustard Seed and the Leaven
18 h He said therefore, “What is the kingdom of God like? And to what shall
I compare it? 19[†]It is like i a grain of mustard seed that a man took and
sowed in his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air
made nests in its branches.”
20And again he said, “To what shall I compare the kingdom of God?
21[†] j It is like leaven that a woman took and hid in k three measures of
flour, until it was l all leavened.”
The Narrow Door
22 m He went on his way through towns and villages, teaching and
n journeying toward Jerusalem. 23[†]And someone said to him, “Lord, o will
those who are saved be few?” And he said to them, 24[†] p “Strive q to enter
through the narrow door. For many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not
be able. 25[†] r When once the master of the house has risen and shut the
door, and you begin to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying,
s ‘Lord, open to us,’ then he will answer you, t ‘I do not know where you
come from.’ 26Then you will begin to say, u ‘We ate and drank in your
presence, and you taught in our streets.’ 27[†]But he will say, ‘I tell you, t I
do not know where you come from. v Depart from me, all you workers of
evil!’ 28[†] w In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when
you see w Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom
of God but w you yourselves cast out. 29[†]And w people will come from
east and west, and from north and south, and x recline at table in the
kingdom of God. 30[†]And behold, y some are last who will be first, and
some are first who will be last.”
Lament over Jerusalem
31[†]At that very hour some Pharisees came and said to him, “Get away
from z here, for a Herod wants to kill you.” 32[†]And he said to them, “Go
and tell that fox, ‘Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and
tomorrow, and the third day b I finish my course. 33[†]Nevertheless, c I
d must go on my way today and tomorrow and the day following, for it
cannot be that e a prophet should perish away from Jerusalem.’ 34[†] f O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that g kills the prophets and stones those who
are sent to it! h How often would I have i gathered j your children together
k as a hen gathers her brood l under her wings, and m you were not willing!
35[†]Behold, n your house is forsaken. And I tell you, you will not see me
until you say, o ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!’”
Healing of a Man on the Sabbath
LUKE 14 One Sabbath, p when he went to dine at the house of a ruler of the
Pharisees, they were q watching him carefully.
2[†]And behold, there was a
man before him who had dropsy.
3[†]And Jesus responded to r the lawyers
and Pharisees, saying, s “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath, or not?” 4But
they remained silent. Then he took him and healed him and sent him away.
5And he said to them, t “Which of you, having a son [1] or an ox that has
fallen into a well on a Sabbath day, will not immediately pull him out?”
6[†] u And they could not reply to these things.
The Parable of the Wedding Feast
7[†]Now he told a parable to those who were invited, when he noticed
v how they chose the places of honor, saying to them, 8“When you are
invited by someone to a wedding feast, do not sit down in a place of honor,
lest someone more distinguished than you be invited by him, 9and he who
invited you both will come and say to you, ‘Give your place to this person,’
and then you will begin with shame to take the lowest place. 10But when
you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place, w so that when your host
comes he may say to you, ‘Friend, move up higher.’ Then you will be
honored in the presence of all who sit at table with you. 11For x everyone
who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be
exalted.”
The Parable of the Great Banquet
12[†]He said also to the man who had invited him, “When you give y a
dinner or a banquet, do not invite your friends or your brothers [2] or your
relatives or rich neighbors, z lest they also invite you in return and you be
repaid. 13But when you give a feast, a invite b the poor, the crippled, the
lame, the blind, 14and you will be blessed, because they cannot repay you.
For you will be repaid c at d the resurrection of the just.”
15[†]When one of those who reclined at table with him heard these
things, he said to him, e “Blessed is everyone who will f eat bread in the
kingdom of God!” 16[†]But he said to him, g “A man once h gave a great
banquet and invited many.
17And at the time for the banquet he i sent his
servant [3] to say to those who had been invited, ‘Come, for everything is
now ready.’ 18But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said to
him, ‘I have bought a field, and I must go out and see it. Please have me
excused.’ 19And another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to
examine them. Please have me excused.’ 20And another said, j ‘I have
married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.’ 21[†]So the servant came and
reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house became
angry and said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly to the streets and lanes of the
city, and bring in k the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’ 22And the
servant said, ‘Sir, what you commanded has been done, and still there is
room.’ 23And the master said to the servant, ‘Go out to the highways and
hedges and compel people to come in, that my house may be filled. 24For I
tell you, [4] m none of those men who were invited shall taste my banquet.’”
The Cost of Discipleship
25Now great crowds accompanied him, and he turned and said to them,
26[†] n “If anyone comes to me and o does not hate his own father and
mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, p yes, and even his
own life, he cannot be my disciple. 27 q Whoever does not r bear his own
cross and come after me cannot be my disciple. 28[†]For which of you,
desiring to build a tower, does not s first sit down and count the cost,
whether he has enough to complete it? 29Otherwise, when he has laid a
foundation and is not able to finish, all who see it begin to mock him,
30saying, ‘This man began to build and was not able to finish.’ 31Or what
king, going out to encounter another king in war, will not t sit down first
and deliberate whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes
against him with twenty thousand? 32And if not, while the other is yet a
great way off, he sends a delegation and asks for terms of peace. 33[†] u So
therefore, any one of you who v does not renounce all that he has cannot be
my disciple.
Salt Without Taste Is Worthless
34[†] w “Salt is good, x but if salt has lost its taste, how shall its saltiness be
restored? 35It is of no use either for the soil or for the manure pile. It is
thrown away. y He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
The Parable of the Lost Sheep