MARK 10 [†] z And he left there and went a to the region of Judea and
beyond the Jordan, and crowds gathered to him again. And again, as was his
custom, he taught them.
2[†]And Pharisees came up and in order b to test him asked, c “Is it
lawful for a man to divorce his wife?” 3He answered them, “What did
Moses command you?” 4[†]They said, d “Moses allowed a man to write a
certificate of divorce and to send her away.” 5And Jesus said to them,
“Because of your e hardness of heart he wrote you this commandment. 6But
f from the beginning of creation, ‘God made them g male and female.’
7
h ‘Therefore a man shall leave his father and mother and hold fast to his
wife, [1] 8and i the two shall become one flesh.’ So they are no longer two
but one flesh. 9 j What therefore God has joined together, let not man
separate.”
10[†]And in the house the disciples asked him again about this matter.
11And he said to them, k “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another
commits adultery against her,
12[†]and l if she divorces her husband and
marries another, she commits adultery.”
Let the Children Come to Me
13[†] m And they were bringing children to him that he might touch them,
and the disciples n rebuked them. 14But when Jesus saw it, he was indignant
and said to them, o “Let the children come to me; p do not hinder them, for
to such belongs the kingdom of God. 15 q Truly, I say to you, whoever does
not r receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it.” 16And s he
took them in his arms and blessed them, t laying his hands on them.
The Rich Young Man
17[†] u And as he was setting out on his journey, a man ran up and v knelt
before him and asked him, “Good Teacher, what must I do to w inherit
eternal life?” 18[†]And Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No
one is good except God alone. 19[†]You know the commandments: x ‘Do
not murder, Do not commit adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false
witness, Do not defraud, Honor your father and mother.’” 20[†]And he said
to him, “Teacher, y all these I have kept from my youth.” 21[†]And Jesus,
z looking at him, a loved him, and said to him, “You lack one thing: go,
b sell all that you have and give to the poor, and you will have c treasure in
heaven; and come, follow me.” 22[†] d Disheartened by the saying, he went
away sorrowful, for he had great possessions.
23And Jesus e looked around and said to his disciples, f “How difficult it
will be for those who have wealth to enter g the kingdom of God!” 24And
the disciples h were amazed at his words. But Jesus said to them again,
i “Children, j how difficult it is [2] to enter g the kingdom of God! 25[†]It is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich person to
enter g the kingdom of God.” 26And they were exceedingly astonished, and
said to him, [3] “Then who can be saved?” 27Jesus k looked at them and said,
l “With man it is impossible, but not with God. For all things are possible
with God.” 28Peter began to say to him, “See, m we have left everything and
followed you.” 29[†]Jesus said, “Truly, I say to you, n there is no one who
has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or lands,
for my sake and o for the gospel, 30who will not receive a hundredfold
p now in this time, houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children
and lands, q with persecutions, and in r the age to come eternal life. 31But
s many who are first will be last, and the last first.”
Jesus Foretells His Death a Third Time
32[†] t And they were on the road, going up to Jerusalem, and u Jesus was
walking ahead of them. And v they were amazed, and those who followed
were afraid. And taking the twelve again, he began to tell them what was to
happen to him, 33saying, “See, w we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son
of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they
will x condemn him to death and y deliver him over to the Gentiles. 34And
they will z mock him and a spit on him, and flog him and kill him. And
b after three days he will rise.”
The Request of James and John
35[†] c And James and John, d the sons of Zebedee, came up to him and said
to him, “Teacher, we want you to do for us e whatever we ask of you.”
36And he said to them, f “What do you want me to do for you?” 37And they
said to him, “Grant us g to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left,
h in your glory.” 38[†]Jesus said to them, i “You do not know what you are
asking. Are you able j to drink the cup that I drink, or k to be baptized with
the baptism with which I am baptized?” 39[†]And they said to him, “We are
able.” And Jesus said to them, l “The cup that I drink m you will drink, and
with the baptism with which I am baptized, n you will be baptized, 40[†]but
to sit at my right hand or at my left is not mine to grant, o but it is for those
for whom it has been p prepared.” 41[†]And when the ten heard it, they
began to be indignant at James and John. 42[†] q And Jesus called them to
him and said to them, “You know that those who are considered rulers of
the Gentiles r lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over
them. 43But s it shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great
among you must be your servant, [4] 44and whoever would be first among
you must be t slave [5] of all. 45[†]For even the Son of Man came not to be
served but u to serve, and v to give his life as a ransom for w many.”
Jesus Heals Blind Bartimaeus
46[†] x And they came to Jericho. And y as he was leaving Jericho with his
disciples and a great crowd, Bartimaeus, z a blind beggar, the son of
Timaeus, was sitting by the roadside. 47[†]And when he heard that it was
a Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and say, “Jesus, Son of David, have
mercy on me!” 48And many b rebuked him, telling him to be silent. But he
cried out all the more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!” 49And Jesus
stopped and said, “Call him.” And they called the blind man, saying to him,
c “Take heart. Get up; he is calling you.” 50And throwing off his d cloak, he
sprang up and came to Jesus. 51And Jesus said to him, e “What do you want
me to do for you?” And the blind man said to him, f “Rabbi, let me recover
my sight.” 52[†]And Jesus said to him, “Go your way; g your faith has
h made you well.” And immediately he recovered his sight and followed
him on the way.
The Triumphal Entry