MATTHEW 21 [†] q Now when they drew near to Jerusalem and came to
Bethphage, to r the Mount of Olives, then Jesus s sent two disciples, 2saying
to them, “Go into the village in front of you, and immediately you will find
a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me. 3If
anyone says anything to you, you shall say, ‘The Lord needs them,’ and he
will send them at once.” 4[†]This took place t to fulfill what was spoken by
the prophet, saying,
5 u “Say to the daughter of Zion,
‘Behold, your king is coming to you,
v humble, and mounted on a donkey,
on a colt, [1] the foal of a beast of burden.’”
6[†]The disciples went and did as Jesus had directed them. 7They brought
the donkey and the colt and put on them their cloaks, and he sat on them.
8[†]Most of the crowd w spread their cloaks on the road, and others cut
branches from the trees and spread them on the road. 9[†]And the crowds
that went before him and that followed him were shouting, x “Hosanna to
y the Son of David! z Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
Hosanna a in the highest!” 10And b when he entered Jerusalem, the whole
city was stirred up, saying, “Who is this?” 11And the crowds said, “This is
c the prophet Jesus, d from Nazareth of Galilee.”
Jesus Cleanses the Temple
12[†] e And Jesus entered the temple [2] and drove out all who sold and
bought in the temple, and he overturned the tables of f the money-changers
and the seats of those who sold g pigeons. 13He said to them, “It is written,
h ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer,’ but i you make it a den of
robbers.”
14 j And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed
them. 15[†] k But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful
things that he did, and the children crying out in the temple, x “Hosanna to
the Son of David!” they were indignant, 16and they said to him, “Do you
hear what these are saying?” And Jesus said to them, “Yes; l have you never
read,
m “‘Out of the mouth of n infants and nursing babies
you have prepared praise’?”
17[†]And o leaving them, he p went out of the city to q Bethany and lodged
there.
Jesus Curses the Fig Tree
18[†] r In the morning, as he was returning to the city, s he became hungry.
19[†] t And seeing a fig tree by the wayside, he went to it and found nothing
on it but only leaves. And he said to it, “May no fruit ever come from you
again!” And the fig tree withered at once.
20When the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, “How did the fig tree
wither at once?” 21And Jesus answered them, u “Truly, I say to you, v if you
have faith and w do not doubt, you will not only do what has been done to
the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, x ‘Be taken up and thrown
into the sea,’ it will happen. 22And v whatever you ask in prayer, you will
receive, y if you have faith.”
The Authority of Jesus Challenged
23[†] z And when he entered the temple, the chief priests and the elders of
the people came up to him a as he was teaching, and said, b “By what
authority are you doing these things, and who gave you this authority?”
24Jesus answered them, “I also will ask you one question, and if you tell me
the answer, then I also will tell you by what authority I do these things.
25[†]The baptism of John, c from where did it come? d From heaven or from
man?” And they discussed it among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From
heaven,’ he will say to us, e ‘Why then did you not believe him?’ 26But if
we say, ‘From man,’ f we are afraid of the crowd, for they all hold that John
was g a prophet.” 27So they answered Jesus, “We do not know.” And he said
to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.
The Parable of the Two Sons
28[†] h “What do you think? A man had two sons. And he went to the first
and said, ‘Son, go and work in i the vineyard today.’ 29And he answered, ‘I
will not,’ but afterward he j changed his mind and went. 30And he went to
the other son and said the same. And he answered, ‘I go, sir,’ but did not go.
31Which of the two did the will of his father?” They said, “The first.” Jesus
said to them, “Truly, I say to you, k the tax collectors and l the prostitutes go
into m the kingdom of God before you. 32For John came to you n in the way
of righteousness, and o you did not believe him, but p the tax collectors and
the prostitutes believed him. And even when you saw it, you did not
afterward j change your minds and believe him.
The Parable of the Tenants
33[†] q “Hear another parable. There was a master of a house who planted r a
vineyard s and put a fence around it and dug a winepress in it and built a
tower and t leased it to tenants, and u went into another country.
34[†]When
the season for fruit drew near, he sent his servants [3] to the tenants t to get
his fruit. 35 v And the tenants took his servants and beat one, killed another,
and w stoned another.
36 x Again he sent other servants, more than the first.
And they did the same to them. 37Finally he sent his son to them, saying,
‘They will respect my son.’ 38But when the tenants saw the son, they said to
themselves, y ‘This is the heir. Come, z let us kill him and have his
inheritance.’ 39And they took him and a threw him out of the vineyard and
killed him. 40 b When therefore the owner of the vineyard comes, what will
he do to those tenants?” 41They said to him, c “He will put those wretches
to a miserable death and d let out the vineyard to other tenants who will
give him the fruits in their seasons.”
42[†]Jesus said to them, e “Have you never read in the Scriptures:
f “‘The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone; [4]
this was the Lord’s doing,
and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
43[†]Therefore I tell you, the kingdom of God g will be taken away from
you and given to a people h producing its fruits. 44And i the one who falls
on this stone will be broken to pieces; and j when it falls on anyone, it will
crush him.” [5]
45When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they
perceived that he was speaking about them. 46And l although they were
seeking to arrest him, m they feared the crowds, because they held him to be
n a prophet.
The Parable of the Wedding Feast