MATTHEW 12 [†]At that time w Jesus went through the grainfields on the
Sabbath. His disciples were hungry, and x they began to pluck heads of
grain and to eat. 2[†]But when the Pharisees saw it, they said to him,
y “Look, your disciples are doing z what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.”
3He said to them, a “Have you not read what David did when he was
hungry, and those who were with him: 4[†]how he entered the house of God
and ate b the bread of the Presence, which it was not lawful for him to eat
nor for those who were with him, but only for the priests? 5[†]Or have you
not read c in the Law how on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane
the Sabbath and are guiltless? 6I tell you, d something greater than the
temple is here. 7[†]And if you had known e what this means, f ‘I desire
mercy, and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the guiltless.
8[†]For g the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.”
A Man with a Withered Hand
9[†]He went on from there and h entered their synagogue. 10And a man was
there with a withered hand. And they asked him, i “Is it lawful to heal on
the Sabbath?”— j so that they might accuse him. 11He said to them, “Which
one of you who has a sheep, k if it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will not
take hold of it and lift it out? 12 l Of how much more value is a man than a
sheep! So m it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.” 13Then he said to the
man, “Stretch out your hand.” And n the man stretched it out, and it was
restored, healthy like the other.
14But the Pharisees went out and conspired
against him, how to destroy him.
God’s Chosen Servant
15Jesus, aware of this, o withdrew from there. And p many followed him,
and he healed them all 16[†]and q ordered them not to make him known.
17[†] r This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah:
18[†] s “Behold, my t servant whom I have chosen,
my beloved with whom my soul is well pleased.
u I will put my Spirit upon him,
and he will proclaim justice to the Gentiles.
19 He will not quarrel or cry aloud,
nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets;
20 a bruised reed he will not break,
and a smoldering wick he will not quench,
until he brings justice to victory;
21
v and in his name the Gentiles will hope.”
Blasphemy Against the Holy Spirit
22 w Then a demon-oppressed man who was blind and mute was brought to
him, and he healed him, so that the man spoke and saw.
23[†] x And all the
people were amazed, and said, x “Can this be the Son of David?” 24[†]But
when the Pharisees heard it, they said, y “It is only by Beelzebul, the prince
of demons, that this man casts out demons.” 25[†] z Knowing their thoughts,
a he said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and
no city or house divided against itself will stand. 26And if Satan casts out
Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
27[†]And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, b by whom do c your sons cast
them out? Therefore they will be your judges. 28[†]But if it is d by the Spirit
of God that I cast out demons, then e the kingdom of God has come upon
you. 29[†]Or f how can someone enter a strong man’s house and plunder his
goods, unless he first binds the strong man? Then indeed g he may plunder
his house. 30 h Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not
gather with me scatters. 31[†] i Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy
will be forgiven people, but j the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be
forgiven. 32And whoever speaks a word k against the Son of Man l will be
forgiven, but j whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven,
either in m this age or in the age to come.
A Tree Is Known by Its Fruit
33
n “Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and
its fruit bad, o for the tree is known by its fruit. 34 p You brood of vipers!
How can you speak good, q when you are evil? r For out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks. 35
r The good person out of his good treasure
brings forth good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure brings forth
evil. 36[†]I tell you, s on the day of judgment t people will give account for
u every careless word they speak, 37for v by your words you will be
justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”
The Sign of Jonah
38[†]Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying,
“Teacher, w we wish to see a sign from you.” 39[†]But he answered them,
x “An evil and y adulterous generation seeks for a sign, but no sign will be
given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah. 40[†]For z just as Jonah was
three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, a so will the Son of
Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. 41 b The men of
Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and c condemn it,
for d they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, e something
greater than Jonah is here. 42[†] f The queen of the South will rise up at the
judgment with this generation and condemn it, for she came from the ends
of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, e something
greater than Solomon is here.
Return of an Unclean Spirit
43[†]“When g the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it passes through
h waterless places seeking rest, but finds none. 44Then it says, ‘I will return
to my house from which I came.’ And when it comes, it finds the house
empty, swept, and put in order.
45[†]Then it goes and brings with it seven
other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there, and i the
last state of that person is worse than the first. So also will it be with this
j evil generation.”
Jesus’ Mother and Brothers
46[†]While he was still speaking to the people, behold, k his mother and his
l brothers stood outside, asking to speak to him. [1] 48But he replied to the
man who told him, “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
49[†]And stretching out his hand toward his disciples, he said, “Here are my
mother and my brothers! 50For m whoever n does the will of my Father in
heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”
The Parable of the Sower