REVELATION 3 [†]“And to the angel of the church in Sardis write: ‘The
words of him i who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars.
“‘I know your works. You have the reputation j of being alive, k but you
are dead. 2[†]Wake up, and strengthen what remains and is about to die, for
I have not found your works l complete in the sight of my God.
3 m Remember, then, what you received and heard. Keep it, and repent. If
you will not wake up, n I will come o like a thief, and you will not know at
what hour I will come against you. 4[†]Yet you have still a few names in
Sardis, people who have not p soiled their garments, and they will walk
with me q in white, for they are r worthy.
5
s The one who conquers will be
clothed thus in white garments, and I will never t blot his name out of u the
book of life. v I will confess his name before my Father and before his
angels. 6
p He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches.’
To the Church in Philadelphia
7[†]“And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: ‘The words of
w the holy one, x the true one, y who has the key of David, z who opens and
no one will shut, who shuts and no one opens.
8[†]“‘I know your works. Behold, I have set before you a an open door,
which no one is able to shut. I know that you have but little power, and yet
you have kept my word and have not denied my name. 9[†]Behold, I will
make those of b the synagogue of Satan who say that they are Jews and are
not, but lie—behold, c I will make them come and bow down before your
feet, and they will learn that d I have loved you. 10[†] e Because you have
kept my word about patient endurance, I will keep you from the hour of
trial that is coming on the whole world, to try f those who dwell on the
earth. 11 g I am coming soon. h Hold fast what you have, so that no one may
seize i your crown. 12 j The one who conquers, I will make him k a pillar in
the temple of my God. Never shall he go out of it, and I will write on him
l the name of my God, and m the name of the city of my God, m the new
Jerusalem, n which comes down from my God out of heaven, and my own
o new name. 13 p He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
churches.’
To the Church in Laodicea
14[†]“And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write: ‘The words of the
p Amen, q the faithful and true witness, r the beginning of God’s creation.
15[†]“‘I know your works: you are neither cold nor hot. s Would that you
were either cold or hot! 16So, because you are lukewarm, and neither hot
nor cold, I will spit you out of my mouth. 17[†] t For you say, I am rich, I
have prospered, and I need nothing, not realizing that you are wretched,
pitiable, poor, u blind, and naked. 18I counsel you v to buy from me gold
refined by fire, so that you may be rich, and w white garments so that you
may clothe yourself and x the shame of your nakedness may not be seen,
and salve to anoint your eyes, u so that you may see. 19[†] y Those whom I
love, I reprove and discipline, so be zealous and repent. 20Behold, I stand at
the door and z knock. a If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, b I
will come in to him and eat with him, and he with me. 21[†] c The one who
conquers, d I will grant him to sit with me on my throne, as e I also
conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne. 22 p He who has an
ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.’”
The Throne in Heaven