REVELATION 9 [†]And the fifth angel blew his trumpet, and q I saw a star
fallen from heaven to earth, and he was given r the key to the shaft of s the
bottomless pit. [1] 2[†]He opened the shaft of the bottomless pit, and from
the shaft t rose smoke like the smoke of a great furnace, and u the sun and
the air were darkened with the smoke from the shaft. 3Then from the smoke
came v locusts on the earth, and they were given power like the power of
scorpions of the earth. 4[†]They were told w not to harm x the grass of the
earth or any green plant or any tree, but only those people who do not have
y the seal of God on their foreheads. 5They were allowed to torment them
z for five months, but not to kill them, and their torment was like the
torment of a scorpion when it stings someone. 6And in those days a people
will seek death and will not find it. They will long to die, but death will flee
from them.
7 b In appearance the locusts were like horses prepared for battle: c on
their heads were what looked like crowns of gold; their faces were d like
human faces, 8their hair like women’s hair, and e their teeth like lions’ teeth;
9they had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the noise of their wings
was f like the noise of many chariots with g horses rushing into battle.
10They have tails and stings like scorpions, and their power to hurt people
h for five months is in their tails. 11[†]They have i as king over them the
angel of the bottomless pit. His name in Hebrew is j Abaddon, and in Greek
he is called Apollyon. [2]
12 k The first woe has passed; behold, two woes are still to come.
13[†]Then the sixth angel blew his trumpet, and I heard a voice from l the
four horns of the golden altar before God, 14saying to the sixth angel who
had the trumpet, “Release m the four angels who are bound at n the great
river Euphrates.” 15So the four angels, who had been prepared for the hour,
the day, the month, and the year, were released o to kill a third of mankind.
16[†]The number of p mounted troops was q twice ten thousand times ten
thousand; r I heard their number.
17And this is how I saw the horses in my
vision and those who rode them: they wore breastplates the color of fire and
of sapphire [3] and of sulfur, and the heads of the horses were s like lions’
heads, and fire and smoke and sulfur came out of their mouths. 18By these
three plagues a third of mankind was killed, by the fire and smoke and
sulfur coming out of their mouths. 19For the power of the horses is in their
mouths and in their tails, for their tails are like serpents with heads, and by
means of them they wound.
20[†]The rest of mankind, who were not killed by these plagues, t did not
repent of u the works of their hands nor give up worshiping v demons w and
idols of gold and silver and bronze and stone and wood, which cannot see
or hear or walk, 21nor did they repent of their murders or their x sorceries or
their sexual immorality or their thefts.
The Angel and the Little Scroll