1 CHRONICLES 21 [†] f Then g Satan stood against Israel and incited David to
number Israel. 2So David said to Joab and the commanders of the army,
“Go, number Israel, from Beersheba to Dan, and bring me a report, that I
may know their number.” 3[†]But Joab said, “May the LORD add to his
people a hundred times as many as they are! Are they not, my lord the king,
all of them my lord’s servants? Why then should my lord require this? Why
should it be a cause of guilt for Israel?” 4But the king’s word prevailed
against Joab. So Joab departed and went throughout all Israel and came
back to Jerusalem. 5[†]And Joab gave the sum of the numbering of the
people to David. In all Israel there were h 1,100,000 men who drew the
sword, and in Judah h 470,000 who drew the sword. 6 i But he did not
include Levi and Benjamin in the numbering, for the king’s command was
abhorrent to Joab.
7[†]But God was displeased with this thing, and he struck Israel. 8And
David said to God, “I have sinned greatly in that I have done this thing. But
now, please j take away the iniquity of your servant, for I have acted very
foolishly.” 9And the LORD spoke to Gad, David’s k seer, saying, 10“Go and
say to David, ‘Thus says the LORD, Three things I offer you; choose one of
them, that I may do it to you.’” 11So Gad came to David and said to him,
“Thus says the LORD, ‘Choose what you will: 12[†]either l three years of
famine, or three months of devastation by your foes while the sword of your
enemies overtakes you, or else three days of the sword of the LORD,
pestilence on the land, with the angel of the LORD destroying throughout all
the territory of Israel.’ Now decide what answer I shall return to him who
sent me.” 13Then David said to Gad, “I am in great distress. Let me fall into
the hand of the LORD, for his mercy is very great, but do not let me fall into
the hand of man.”
14[†]So the LORD sent a pestilence on Israel, and 70,000 men of Israel
fell. 15And God sent the angel to Jerusalem to destroy it, but as he was
about to destroy it, the LORD saw, and he m relented from the calamity. And
he said to the angel who was working destruction, “It is enough; now stay
your hand.” And the angel of the LORD was standing by the threshing floor
of Ornan the Jebusite. 16And David lifted his eyes and saw the angel of the
LORD standing between earth and heaven, and in his hand a drawn sword
stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, n clothed in
sackcloth, fell upon their faces. 17[†]And David said to God, “Was it not I
who gave command to number the people? It is I who have sinned and done
great evil. But these sheep, what have they done? Please let your hand, O
LORD my God, be against me and against my father’s house. But do not let
the plague be on your people.”
David Builds an Altar
18[†]Now o the angel of the LORD had commanded Gad to say to David that
David should go up and raise an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of
Ornan the Jebusite. 19So David went up at Gad’s word, which he had
spoken in the name of the LORD.
20Now Ornan was threshing wheat. He
turned and saw the angel, and his four sons who were with him hid
themselves. 21As David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David and
went out from the threshing floor and paid homage to David with his face to
the ground. 22And David said to Ornan, “Give me the site of the threshing
floor that I may build on it an altar to the LORD—give it to me at its full
price—that the plague may be averted from the people.” 23Then Ornan said
to David, “Take it, and let my lord the king do what seems good to him.
See, I give the oxen for burnt offerings and the threshing sledges for the
wood and the wheat for a grain offering; I give it all.” 24But King David
said to Ornan, “No, but I will buy them for the full price. I will not take for
the LORD what is yours, nor offer burnt offerings that cost me nothing.”
25So David paid Ornan p 600 shekels [1] of gold by weight for the site.
26[†]And David built there an altar to the LORD and presented burnt
offerings and peace offerings and called on the LORD, and the LORD [2]
q answered him with fire from heaven upon the altar of burnt offering.
27Then the LORD commanded the angel, and he put his sword back into its
sheath.
28[†]At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered him at the
threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, he sacrificed there. 29For the
tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses had made in the wilderness, and the
altar of burnt offering r were at that time in the high place at Gibeon, 30but
David could not go before it to inquire of God, for he was afraid of the
sword of the angel of the LORD.
1 CHRONICLES 22 Then David said, s “Here shall be the house of the
LORD God and here the altar of burnt offering for Israel.”
David Prepares for Temple Building
2[†]David commanded to gather together the t resident aliens who were in
the land of Israel, and he u set stonecutters to prepare dressed stones for
building the house of God. 3David also provided great quantities of iron for
nails for the doors of the gates and for clamps, v as well as bronze in
quantities beyond weighing, 4and cedar timbers without number, w for the
Sidonians and Tyrians brought great quantities of cedar to David. 5For
David said, x “Solomon my son is young and inexperienced, and the house
that is to be built for the LORD must be exceedingly magnificent, of fame
and glory throughout all lands. I will therefore make preparation for it.” So
David provided materials in great quantity before his death.
Solomon Charged to Build the Temple
6[†]Then he called for Solomon his son and charged him to build a house
for the LORD, the God of Israel. 7David said to Solomon, “My son, y I had it
in my heart to build a house to the name of the LORD my God. 8But the
word of the LORD came to me, saying, z ‘You have shed much blood and
have waged great wars. You shall not build a house to my name, because
you have shed so much blood before me on the earth. 9Behold, a son shall
be born to you who shall be a man of rest. a I will give him rest from all his
surrounding enemies. b For his name shall be Solomon, and I will give
peace and quiet to Israel in his days. 10 c He shall build a house for my
name. d He shall be my son, and I will be his father, and I will establish his
royal throne in Israel forever.’
11[†]“Now, my son, e the LORD be with you, so that you may succeed in
building the house of the LORD your God, as he has spoken concerning you.
12 f Only, may the LORD grant you discretion and understanding, that when
he gives you charge over Israel you may keep the law of the LORD your
God. 13 g Then you will prosper if you are careful to observe the statutes and
the rules that the LORD commanded Moses for Israel. h Be strong and
courageous. Fear not; do not be dismayed. 14[†]With great pains I have
provided for the house of the LORD i 100,000 talents [1] of gold, a million
talents of silver, and j bronze and iron beyond weighing, for there is so
much of it; timber and stone, too, I have provided. To these you must add.
15You have an abundance of workmen: stonecutters, masons, carpenters,
and all kinds of craftsmen without number, skilled in working 16gold, silver,
bronze, and iron. Arise and work! k The LORD be with you!”
17David also commanded l all the leaders of Israel to help Solomon his
son, saying, 18“Is not the LORD your God with you? And m has he not given
you peace on every side? For he has delivered the inhabitants of the land
into my hand, and the land is subdued before the LORD and his people.
19Now n set your mind and heart to seek the LORD your God. Arise and
build the sanctuary of the LORD God, o so that the ark of the covenant of the
LORD and the holy vessels of God may be brought into a house built p for
the name of the LORD.”
David Organizes the Levites