1 CHRONICLES 26 [†]As for the divisions of the gatekeepers: of the
Korahites, Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph. 2And
Meshelemiah had sons: g Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second,
Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth, 3Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth,
Eliehoenai the seventh. 4And h Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the
firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, Sachar the fourth, Nethanel
the fifth, 5Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth, i for
God blessed him. 6Also to his son Shemaiah were sons born who were
rulers in their fathers’ houses, for they were men of great ability.
7The sons
of Shemaiah: Othni, Rephael, Obed and Elzabad, whose brothers were able
men, Elihu and Semachiah. 8All these were of the sons of Obed-edom with
their sons and brothers, able men qualified for the service; sixty-two of
Obed-edom. 9And Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, able men, eighteen.
10And j Hosah, of the sons of Merari, had sons: Shimri the chief (for though
he was not the firstborn, his father made him chief), 11Hilkiah the second,
Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: all the sons and brothers of Hosah
were thirteen.
12[†]These divisions of the gatekeepers, corresponding to their chief men,
had duties, just as their brothers did, ministering in the house of the LORD.
13And they cast lots by fathers’ houses, k small and great alike, for their
gates. 14The lot for the east fell to Shelemiah. They cast lots also for his son
Zechariah, a shrewd counselor, and his lot came out for the north. 15Obed-
edom’s came out for the south, and to his sons was allotted l the gatehouse.
16For Shuppim and j Hosah it came out for the west, at the gate of
Shallecheth on the road that goes up. Watch corresponded to watch. 17On
the east there were six each day, [1] on the north four each day, on the south
four each day, as well as two and two at the gatehouse. 18And for the
n colonnade [2] on the west there were four at the road and two at the
colonnade. 19These were the divisions of the gatekeepers among the
Korahites and the sons of Merari.
Treasurers and Other Officials
20[†]And of the Levites, Ahijah had charge of o the treasuries of the house
of God and the treasuries of the dedicated gifts. 21The sons of Ladan, the
sons of the Gershonites belonging to Ladan, the heads of the fathers’ houses
belonging to Ladan the Gershonite: p Jehieli. [3]
22
q The sons of Jehieli, Zetham, and Joel his brother, were in charge of
the treasuries of the house of the LORD.
23 r Of the Amramites, the Izharites,
the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites— 24and s Shebuel the son of Gershom,
son of Moses, was chief officer in charge of the treasuries. 25His brothers:
from t Eliezer were his son Rehabiah, and his son u Jeshaiah, and his son
Joram, and his son Zichri, and his son v Shelomoth. 26This Shelomoth and
his brothers were in charge of all the treasuries of the dedicated gifts that
David the king and the heads of the fathers’ houses and the officers of the
thousands and the hundreds and the commanders of the army w had
dedicated. 27From spoil won in battles they dedicated gifts for the
maintenance of the house of the LORD.
28Also all that x Samuel the seer and
Saul the son of Kish and Abner the son of Ner and Joab the son of Zeruiah
had dedicated—all dedicated gifts were in the care of v Shelomoth [4] and
his brothers.
29[†]Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were appointed to
y external duties for Israel, z as officers and judges. 30Of the Hebronites,
a Hashabiah and his brothers, 1,700 men of ability, had the oversight of
Israel westward of the Jordan for all the work of the LORD and for the
service of the king. 31Of the Hebronites, b Jerijah was chief of the
Hebronites of whatever genealogy or fathers’ houses. (In the fortieth year of
David’s reign search was made and men of great ability among them were
found at c Jazer in Gilead.) 32King David appointed him and his brothers,
2,700 men of ability, heads of fathers’ houses, to have the oversight of the
Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of the Manassites for everything
pertaining to God and for d the affairs of the king.
Military Divisions