1 CHRONICLES 5 [†]The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel ( c for he was
the firstborn, but because d he defiled his father’s couch, e his birthright was
given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, so that he could not be enrolled
as the oldest son; 2
f though Judah became strong among his brothers and a
g chief came from him, yet the birthright belonged to Joseph), 3[†]the h sons
of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 4The
sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, 5Micah his
son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son, 6Beerah his son, whom i Tiglath-
pileser [1] king of Assyria carried away into exile; he was a chief of the
Reubenites. 7And his kinsmen by their clans, j when the genealogy of their
generations was recorded: the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah, 8and Bela the son
of Azaz, son of k Shema, son of Joel, who lived in l Aroer, as far as m Nebo
and n Baal-meon. 9He also lived to the east as far as the entrance of the
desert this side of the Euphrates, because their livestock had multiplied o in
the land of Gilead. 10And in the days of Saul they waged war against the
p Hagrites, who fell into their hand. And they lived in their tents throughout
all the region east of Gilead.
Descendants of Gad
11[†]The sons of Gad lived over against them in the land of Bashan as far as
q Salecah: 12Joel the chief, Shapham the second, Janai, and Shaphat in
Bashan. 13And their kinsmen according to their fathers’ houses: Michael,
Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia and Eber, seven. 14These were the sons
of Abihail the son of Huri, son of Jaroah, son of Gilead, son of Michael, son
of Jeshishai, son of Jahdo, son of Buz. 15Ahi the son of Abdiel, son of Guni,
was chief in their fathers’ houses, 16and they lived in Gilead, in Bashan and
in its towns, and in all the pasturelands of r Sharon to their limits. 17All of
these were recorded in genealogies in the days of s Jotham king of Judah,
and in the days of t Jeroboam king of Israel.
18[†]The Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh had
valiant men who carried shield and sword, and drew the bow, u expert in
war, 44,760, able to go to war.
19They waged war against the v Hagrites,
w Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab. 20And when they prevailed [2] over them, the
Hagrites and all who were with them were given into their hands, x for they
cried out to God in the battle, and he granted their urgent plea y because
they trusted in him. 21They carried off their livestock: 50,000 of their
camels, 250,000 sheep, 2,000 donkeys, and 100,000 men alive. 22For many
fell, because the war was of God. And they lived z in their place until a the
exile.
The Half-Tribe of Manasseh
23[†]The members of the half-tribe of Manasseh lived in the land. They
were very numerous from Bashan to Baal-hermon, b Senir, and Mount
Hermon. 24These were the heads of their fathers’ houses: Epher, [3] Ishi,
Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty warriors, famous
men, heads of their fathers’ houses. 25[†]But they broke faith with the God
of their fathers, and c whored d after the gods of the peoples of the land,
whom God had destroyed before them. 26So the God of Israel stirred up the
spirit of e Pul king of Assyria, the spirit of f Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria,
and he took them into exile, namely, the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the
half-tribe of Manasseh, and brought them g to Halah, g Habor, Hara, and
g the river Gozan, to this day.
Descendants of Levi