1 CORINTHIANS 15 [†]Now I would remind you, brothers, [1] of the gospel
g I preached to you, which you received, h in which you stand, 2and by
which i you are being saved, if you j hold fast to the word I preached to you
— k unless you believed in vain.
3For l I delivered to you as of first importance what I also received: that
Christ died m for our sins n in accordance with the Scriptures, 4that he was
buried, that he was raised o on the third day p in accordance with the
Scriptures, 5and that q he appeared to Cephas, then r to the twelve. 6[†]Then
he appeared to more than five hundred brothers at one time, most of whom
are still alive, though some have fallen asleep. 7[†]Then he appeared to
s James, then t to all the apostles. 8Last of all, as to one untimely born, u he
appeared also to me. 9[†]For v I am the least of the apostles, unworthy to be
called an apostle, because w I persecuted the church of God. 10But by the
grace of God I am what I am, and his grace toward me was not in vain. On
the contrary, x I worked harder than any of them, y though it was not I, but
the grace of God that is with me. 11Whether then it was I or they, so we
preach and so you believed.
The Resurrection of the Dead
12[†]Now if Christ is proclaimed as raised from the dead, z how can some of
you say that there is no resurrection of the dead? 13But if there is no
resurrection of the dead, a then not even Christ has been raised. 14And if
Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in
vain. 15We are even found to be misrepresenting God, because we testified
about God that b he raised Christ, whom he did not raise if it is true that the
dead are not raised. 16For if the dead are not raised, not even Christ has
been raised. 17[†]And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and
c you are still in your sins. 18Then those also who d have fallen asleep in
Christ have perished. 19If in Christ we have hope [2] in this life only, e we
are of all people most to be pitied.
20[†]But in fact f Christ has been raised from the dead, g the firstfruits of
those who have fallen asleep. 21For as h by a man came death, i by a man
has come also the resurrection of the dead. 22[†]For j as in Adam all die, so
also in Christ shall all be made alive. 23[†]But each in his own order: Christ
the firstfruits, then k at his coming l those who belong to Christ. 24[†]Then
comes the end, when he delivers m the kingdom to God the Father after
destroying n every rule and every authority and power.
25For he must reign
o until he has put all his enemies under his feet. 26The last enemy to be
p destroyed is death. 27For q “God [3] has put all things in subjection under
his feet.” But when it says, “all things are put in subjection,” it is plain that
he is excepted who put all things in subjection under him. 28[†]When r all
things are subjected to him, then the Son himself will also be subjected to
him who put all things in subjection under him, that s God may be all in all.
29[†]Otherwise, what do people mean by being baptized on behalf of the
dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why are people baptized on their
behalf? 30[†]Why are we t in danger every hour? 31I protest, brothers, by
u my pride in you, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, v I die every day!
32What do I gain if, humanly speaking, w I fought with beasts at Ephesus? If
the dead are not raised, x “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.”
33 y Do not be deceived: z “Bad company ruins good morals.” [4] 34 a Wake
up from your drunken stupor, as is right, and do not go on sinning. For
b some have no knowledge of God. c I say this to your shame.
The Resurrection Body
35[†]But someone will ask, d “How are the dead raised? With what kind of
body do they come?” 36You foolish person! e What you sow does not come
to life unless it dies. 37And what you sow is not the body that is to be, but a
bare kernel, perhaps of wheat or of some other grain. 38But God gives it a
body as he has chosen, and to each kind of seed its own body.
39For not all
flesh is the same, but there is one kind for humans, another for animals,
another for birds, and another for fish. 40There are heavenly bodies and
earthly bodies, but the glory of the heavenly is of one kind, and the glory of
the earthly is of another.
41There is one glory of the sun, and another glory
of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for star differs from star in
glory.
42[†] f So is it with the resurrection of the dead. What is sown is
perishable; what is raised is imperishable. 43[†]It is sown in dishonor; g it is
raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power.
44[†]It is sown
a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there is
also a spiritual body.
45Thus it is written, h “The first man Adam became a
living being”; [5] i the last Adam became a j life-giving spirit. 46But it is not
the spiritual that is first but the natural, and then the spiritual. 47 k The first
man was from the earth, l a man of dust; m the second man is from heaven.
48As was the man of dust, so also are those who are of the dust, and as is the
man of heaven, n so also are those who are of heaven. 49Just o as we have
borne the image of the man of dust, p we shall [6] also bear the image of the
man of heaven.
Mystery and Victory
50I tell you this, brothers: q flesh and blood r cannot inherit the kingdom of
God, nor does the perishable inherit the imperishable. 51[†]Behold! I tell
you a mystery. s We shall not all sleep, t but we shall all be changed, 52in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For u the trumpet
will sound, and v the dead will be raised imperishable, and we shall be
changed. 53For this perishable body must put on the imperishable, and
w this mortal body must put on immortality.
54[†]When the perishable puts
on the imperishable, and the mortal puts on immortality, then shall come to
pass the saying that is written:
x “Death is swallowed up in victory.”
55 y “O death, where is your victory?
O death, where is your sting?”
56[†]The sting of death is sin, and z the power of sin is the law.
57But thanks
be to God, a who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
58[†] b Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in c the work of the Lord, knowing that in the Lord d your labor
is not in vain.
The Collection for the Saints