1 KINGS 15 [†] w Now in the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, Abijam began to reign over Judah. 2[†]He reigned for three years in
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.
3And he walked in all the sins that his father did before him, and x his heart
was not wholly true to the LORD his God, as the heart of David his father.
4[†]Nevertheless, for David’s sake the LORD his God gave him y a lamp in
Jerusalem, setting up his son after him, and establishing Jerusalem,
5because z David did what was right in the eyes of the LORD and did not
turn aside from anything that he commanded him all the days of his life,
a except in the matter of Uriah the Hittite. 6[†] b Now there was war between
Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life. 7 c The rest of the acts of
Abijam and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? d And there was war between Abijam
and Jeroboam. 8 e And Abijam slept with his fathers, and they buried him in
the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his place.
Asa Reigns in Judah
9In the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Asa began to reign over
Judah, 10[†]and he reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name
was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom. 11 f And Asa did what was right in
the eyes of the LORD, as David his father had done. 12[†]He put away the
g male cult prostitutes out of the land and removed h all the idols that his
fathers had made. 13[†] i He also removed Maacah his mother from being
queen mother because she had made an abominable image for Asherah. And
Asa cut down her image and j burned it at the brook Kidron. 14[†] k But the
high places were not taken away. Nevertheless, l the heart of Asa was
wholly true to the LORD all his days. 15And m he brought into the house of
the LORD the sacred gifts of his father and his own sacred gifts, silver, and
gold, and vessels.
16
n And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their
days. 17[†] o Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah and p built Ramah,
q that he might permit no one to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
18[†]Then Asa took all the silver and the gold r that were left in the
treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king’s house and
gave them into the hands of his servants. s And King Asa sent them to Ben-
hadad the son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, t who lived
in Damascus, saying, 19“Let there be u a covenant [1] between me and you,
as there was between my father and your father. Behold, I am sending to
you a present of silver and gold. Go, break your covenant with Baasha king
of Israel, that he may withdraw from me.” 20And Ben-hadad listened to
King Asa and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel
and conquered v Ijon, w Dan, x Abel-beth-maacah, and all y Chinneroth,
with all the land of Naphtali. 21And when Baasha heard of it, z he stopped
building Ramah, and he lived in a Tirzah. 22Then King Asa made a
proclamation to all Judah, none was exempt, and they carried away the
stones of Ramah and its timber, with which Baasha had been building, and
with them King Asa built b Geba of Benjamin and c Mizpah. 23 d Now the
rest of all the acts of Asa, all his might, and all that he did, and the cities
that he built, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings
of Judah? But in his old age he was diseased in his feet. 24And Asa slept
with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his
father, and e Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his place.
Nadab Reigns in Israel
25[†] f Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second
year of Asa king of Judah, and he reigned over Israel two years. 26He did
what was evil in the sight of the LORD g and walked in the way of his father,
and in his sin h which he made Israel to sin.
27 i Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against
him. And Baasha struck him down at j Gibbethon, which belonged to the
Philistines, for Nadab and all Israel were laying siege to Gibbethon. 28So
Baasha killed him in the third year of Asa king of Judah and reigned in his
place. 29[†]And as soon as he was king, he killed all the house of Jeroboam.
He left to the house of Jeroboam not one that breathed, until he had
destroyed it, k according to the word of the LORD that he spoke by his
servant Ahijah the Shilonite. 30It was for the sins of Jeroboam that he sinned
and h that he made Israel to sin, and because of the anger to which he
provoked the LORD, the God of Israel.
31Now the rest of the acts of Nadab and all that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 32 l And there
was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
Baasha Reigns in Israel
33In the third year of Asa king of Judah, Baasha the son of Ahijah began to
reign over all Israel at Tirzah, and he reigned twenty-four years. 34He did
what was evil in the sight of the LORD m and walked in the way of Jeroboam
and in his sin which he made Israel to sin.