1 KINGS 4 [†]King Solomon was king over all Israel, 2[†]and these were his
high officials: Azariah the son of Zadok was b the priest; 3[†]Elihoreph and
Ahijah the sons of Shisha were secretaries; c Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud
was recorder; 4 d Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was in command of the army;
e Zadok and Abiathar were priests; 5[†]Azariah the son of Nathan was over
f the officers; Zabud the son of Nathan was priest and g king’s friend;
6Ahishar was in charge of the palace; and h Adoniram the son of Abda was
in charge of i the forced labor.
7[†]Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, who provided food for
the king and his household. Each man had to make provision for one month
in the year.
8These were their names: Ben-hur, in j the hill country of
Ephraim; 9Ben-deker, in Makaz, Shaalbim, Beth-shemesh, and Elonbeth-
hanan; 10Ben-hesed, in Arubboth (to him belonged Socoh and all the land of
Hepher); 11Ben-abinadab, in all k Naphath-dor (he had Taphath the daughter
of Solomon as his wife); 12Baana the son of Ahilud, in l Taanach, Megiddo,
and all l Beth-shean that is beside Zarethan below Jezreel, and from Beth-
shean to Abel-meholah, as far as the other side of Jokmeam; 13Ben-geber,
m in Ramoth-gilead (he had n the villages of Jair the son of Manasseh,
which are in Gilead, and he had o the region of Argob, which is in Bashan,
sixty great cities with walls and bronze bars); 14Ahinadab the son of Iddo,
in Mahanaim; 15Ahimaaz, in Naphtali (he had taken Basemath the daughter
of Solomon as his wife); 16Baana the son of Hushai, in Asher and Bealoth;
17Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar; 18 p Shimei the son of Ela, in
Benjamin; 19Geber the son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, q the country of
Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of Bashan. And there was one
governor who was over the land.
Solomon’s Wealth and Wisdom
20Judah and Israel were as many r as the sand by the sea. They ate and
drank and were happy.
21[†] [1] s Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from
the t Euphrates [2] to the land of the Philistines and to the border of Egypt.
u They brought tribute and served Solomon all the days of his life.
22Solomon’s provision for one day was thirty cors [3] of fine flour and
sixty cors of meal, 23ten fat oxen, and twenty pasture-fed cattle, a hundred
sheep, besides deer, gazelles, roebucks, and fattened fowl. 24For he had
dominion over all the region west of the Euphrates [4] from Tiphsah to
v Gaza, over all the kings west of the Euphrates. w And he had peace on all
sides around him. 25[†]And Judah and Israel x lived in safety, y from Dan
even to Beersheba, z every man under his vine and under his fig tree, all the
days of Solomon. 26[†] a Solomon also had 40,000 [5] stalls of horses for his
chariots, and 12,000 horsemen. 27And those officers supplied provisions for
King Solomon, and for all who came to King Solomon’s table, each one in
his month. They let nothing be lacking. 28Barley also and straw for the
horses and b swift steeds they brought to the place where it was required,
each according to his duty.
29 c And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding beyond measure,
and breadth of mind d like the sand on the seashore, 30[†]so that Solomon’s
wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all e the people of the east f and all the
wisdom of Egypt. 31For he was c wiser than all other men, wiser than Ethan
the Ezrahite, and Heman, Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol, and his
fame was in all the surrounding nations. 32 g He also spoke 3,000 proverbs,
h and his songs were 1,005. 33[†]He spoke of trees, from the cedar that is in
Lebanon to the hyssop that grows out of the wall. He spoke also of beasts,
and of birds, and of reptiles, and of fish. 34And people of all nations came to
hear the wisdom of Solomon, and from i all the kings of the earth, who had
heard of his wisdom.
Preparations for Building the Temple
1 KINGS 5 [1] Now j Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon when
he heard that they had anointed him king in place of his father, k for Hiram
always loved David. 2And Solomon sent word to Hiram, 3[†] l “You know
that David my father could not build a house for the name of the LORD his
God m because of the warfare with which his enemies surrounded him, until
the LORD put them under the soles of his feet. 4 n But now the LORD my God
has given me rest on every side. There is neither adversary nor misfortune.
5And so I intend to build a house for the name of the LORD my God, o as the
LORD said to David my father, ‘Your son, whom I will set on your throne in
your place, shall build the house for my name.’ 6[†]Now therefore
command that cedars of Lebanon be cut for me. And my servants will join
your servants, and I will pay you for your servants such wages as you set,
for you know that there is no one among us who knows how to cut timber
like the Sidonians.”
7[†]As soon as Hiram heard the words of Solomon, he rejoiced greatly
and said, “Blessed be the LORD this day, who has given to David a wise son
to be over this great people.” 8And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, “I have
heard the message that you have sent to me. I am ready to do all you desire
in the matter of cedar and cypress timber.
9[†]My servants shall bring it
down to the sea from Lebanon, and I will make it into rafts to go by sea to
the place you direct. And I will have them broken up there, and you shall
receive it. And you shall meet my wishes p by providing food for my
household.” 10So Hiram supplied Solomon with all the timber of cedar and
cypress that he desired, 11while Solomon gave Hiram 20,000 cors [2] of
wheat as food for his household, and 20,000 [3] cors of beaten oil. Solomon
gave this to Hiram year by year.
12And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom,
q as he promised him. And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon,
and the two of them made a treaty.
13[†]King Solomon drafted r forced labor out of all Israel, and the draft
numbered 30,000 men. 14[†]And he sent them to Lebanon, 10,000 a month
in shifts. They would be a month in Lebanon and two months at home.
s Adoniram was in charge of the draft. 15Solomon also t had 70,000 burden-
bearers and 80,000 stonecutters in the hill country,
16besides Solomon’s
3,300 u chief officers who were over the work, v who had charge of the
people who carried on the work. 17[†]At the king’s command w they
quarried out great, costly stones in order to lay the foundation of the house
with dressed stones. 18[†]So Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders and
x the men of Gebal did the cutting and prepared the timber and the stone to
build the house.
Solomon Builds the Temple