1 SAMUEL 4 [†]And the word of Samuel came to all Israel.
Now Israel went out to battle against the Philistines. They encamped at
w Ebenezer, and the Philistines encamped at x Aphek. 2The Philistines drew
up in line against Israel, and when the battle spread, Israel was defeated
before the Philistines, who killed about four thousand men on the field of
battle. 3[†]And when the people came to the camp, the elders of Israel said,
“Why has the LORD defeated us today before the Philistines? Let us bring
the ark of the covenant of the LORD here y from Shiloh, that it [1] may come
among us and save us from the power of our enemies.” 4So the people sent
to Shiloh and brought from there the ark of the covenant of the LORD of
hosts, z who is enthroned on the cherubim. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni
and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.
5[†]As soon as the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp,
all Israel a gave a mighty shout, so that the earth resounded. 6[†]And when
the Philistines heard the noise of the shouting, they said, “What does this
great shouting in the camp of the Hebrews mean?” And when they learned
that the ark of the LORD had come to the camp, 7[†]the Philistines were
afraid, for they said, “A god has come into the camp.” And they said, “Woe
to us! For nothing like this has happened before. 8Woe to us! Who can
deliver us from the power of these mighty gods? These are the gods who
struck the Egyptians with every sort of plague in the wilderness. 9 b Take
courage, and be men, O Philistines, lest you become slaves to the Hebrews
c as they have been to you; be men and fight.”
10[†]So the Philistines fought, d and Israel was defeated, e and they fled,
every man to his home. And there was a very great slaughter, for thirty
thousand foot soldiers of Israel fell. 11 f And the ark of God was captured,
g and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, died.
The Death of Eli
12A man of Benjamin ran from the battle line and came to Shiloh the same
day, h with his clothes torn and with dirt on his head. 13When he arrived,
i Eli was sitting on his seat by the road watching, for his heart trembled for
the ark of God. And when the man came into the city and told the news, all
the city cried out. 14When Eli heard the sound of the outcry, he said, “What
is this uproar?” Then the man hurried and came and told Eli. 15Now Eli was
ninety-eight years old j and his eyes were set so that he could not see. 16And
the man said to Eli, “I am he who has come from the battle; I fled from the
battle today.” And he said, k “How did it go, my son?” 17[†]He who brought
the news answered and said, “Israel has fled before the Philistines, and
there has also been a great defeat among the people. Your two sons also,
Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God has been captured.”
18[†]As soon as he mentioned the ark of God, Eli fell over backward l from
his seat by the side of the gate, and his neck was broken and he died, for the
man was old and heavy. He had judged Israel forty years.
19Now his daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinehas, was pregnant, about to
give birth. And when she heard the news that the ark of God was captured,
and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she bowed and gave
birth, for her pains came upon her.
20And about the time of her death the
women attending her said to her, m “Do not be afraid, for you have borne a
son.” But she did not answer or pay attention. 21[†]And she named the child
n Ichabod, saying, o “The glory has departed [2] from Israel!” because p the
ark of God had been captured and because of her father-in-law and her
husband. 22And she said, “The glory has departed from Israel, p for the ark
of God has been captured.”
The Philistines and the Ark
1 SAMUEL 5 When the Philistines captured the ark of God, they brought it
from q Ebenezer to r Ashdod. 2[†]Then the Philistines took the ark of God
and brought it into the house of Dagon and set it up beside s Dagon. 3And
when the people of Ashdod rose early the next day, behold, t Dagon had
fallen face downward on the ground before the ark of the LORD. So they
took Dagon and put him back in his place. 4But when they rose early on the
next morning, behold, Dagon had fallen face downward on the ground
before the ark of the LORD, u and the head of Dagon and both his hands
were lying cut off on the threshold. Only the trunk of Dagon was left to
him. 5This is why the priests of Dagon and all who enter the house of
Dagon v do not tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod to this day.
6[†] w The hand of the LORD was heavy against the people of Ashdod, and
he terrified and afflicted them with x tumors, both Ashdod and its territory.
7And when the men of Ashdod saw how things were, they said, “The ark of
the God of Israel must not remain with us, for his hand is hard against us
and against Dagon our god.” 8[†]So they sent and gathered together all y the
lords of the Philistines and said, “What shall we do with the ark of the God
of Israel?” They answered, “Let the ark of the God of Israel be brought
around to Gath.” So they brought the ark of the God of Israel there. 9But
after they had brought it around, z the hand of the LORD was against the city,
causing a very great panic, and he afflicted the men of the city, both young
and old, so that x tumors broke out on them. 10So they sent the ark of God
to Ekron. But as soon as the ark of God came to Ekron, the people of Ekron
cried out, “They have brought around to us the ark of the God of Israel to
kill us and our people.” 11 y They sent therefore and gathered together all the
lords of the Philistines and said, “Send away the ark of the God of Israel,
and let it return to its own place, that it may not kill us and our people.” For
there was a deathly panic throughout the whole city. w The hand of God was
very heavy there. 12The men who did not die were struck with x tumors, and
the cry of the city went up to heaven.
The Ark Returned to Israel
1 SAMUEL 6 The ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines seven
months. 2And the Philistines called for the priests and a the diviners and
said, “What shall we do with the ark of the LORD? Tell us with what we
shall send it to its place.” 3[†]They said, “If you send away the ark of the
God of Israel, do not send it empty, but by all means return him b a guilt
offering. Then you will be healed, and it will be known to you why c his
hand does not turn away from you.” 4And they said, “What is the guilt
offering that we shall return to him?” They answered, “Five golden
d tumors and five golden mice, e according to the number of the lords of the
Philistines, for the same plague was on all of you and on your lords. 5[†]So
you must make images of your d tumors and images of your mice that
ravage the land, f and give glory to the God of Israel. Perhaps g he will
lighten his hand from off you h and your gods and your land. 6[†]Why
should you harden your hearts as i the Egyptians and j Pharaoh hardened
their hearts? After he had dealt severely with them, k did they not send the
people away, and they departed? 7[†]Now then, take and prepare l a new
cart and two milk cows m on which there has never come a yoke, and yoke
the cows to the cart, but take their calves home, away from them. 8And take
the ark of the LORD and place it on the cart and put in a box at its side n the
figures of gold, which you are returning to him as b a guilt offering. Then
send it off and let it go its way 9and watch. If it goes up on the way to its
own land, to o Beth-shemesh, then it is he who has done us this great harm,
but if not, then we shall know that it is not p his hand that struck us; it
happened to us by coincidence.”
10The men did so, and took two milk cows and yoked them to the cart
and shut up their calves at home. 11And they put the ark of the LORD on the
cart and the box with the golden mice and the images of their tumors.
12[†]And the cows went straight in the direction of q Beth-shemesh along
r one highway, lowing as they went. They turned neither to the right nor to
the left, and the lords of the Philistines went after them as far as the border
of q Beth-shemesh. 13Now the people of q Beth-shemesh were reaping their
wheat harvest in the valley. And when they lifted up their eyes and saw the
ark, they rejoiced to see it. 14The cart came into the field of Joshua of Beth-
shemesh and stopped there. s A great stone was there. And they split up the
wood of the cart and offered the cows as a burnt offering to the LORD.
15And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD and the box that was
beside it, in which were the golden figures, and set them upon s the great
stone. And the men of q Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and
sacrificed sacrifices on that day to the LORD.
16And when t the five lords of
the Philistines saw it, they returned that day to Ekron.
17[†]These are the golden tumors that the Philistines returned as a u guilt
offering to the LORD: one for Ashdod, one for Gaza, one for Ashkelon, one
for Gath, one for Ekron, 18and the golden mice, according to the number of
all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, v both fortified
cities and unwalled villages. w The great stone beside which they set down
the ark of the LORD is a witness to this day in the field of Joshua of Beth-
shemesh.
19[†] x And he struck some of the men of Beth-shemesh, because they
looked upon the ark of the LORD. He struck seventy men of them, [1] and the
people mourned because the LORD had struck the people with a great blow.
20[†]Then the men of Beth-shemesh said, y “Who is able to stand before the
LORD, this holy God? And to whom shall he go up away from us?” 21[†]So
they sent messengers to the inhabitants of z Kiriath-jearim, saying, “The
Philistines have returned the ark of the LORD. Come down and take it up to
you.”