1 SAMUEL 19 [†]And Saul spoke to Jonathan his son and to all his servants,
that they should kill David. r But Jonathan, Saul’s son, delighted much in
David. 2And Jonathan told David, “Saul my father seeks to kill you.
Therefore be on your guard in the morning. Stay in a secret place and hide
yourself. 3And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where
you are, and I will speak to my father about you. And if I learn anything I
will tell you.” 4[†]And Jonathan spoke well of David to Saul his father and
said to him, “Let not the king s sin against his servant David, because he has
not sinned against you, and because his deeds have brought good to you.
5[†]For t he took his life in his hand u and he struck down the Philistine,
v and the LORD worked a great salvation for all Israel. You saw it, and
rejoiced. Why then will you sin against w innocent blood by killing David
without cause?” 6And Saul listened to the voice of Jonathan. Saul swore,
x “As the LORD lives, he shall not be put to death.” 7And Jonathan called
David, and Jonathan reported to him all these things. And Jonathan brought
David to Saul, and he was in his presence y as before.
8And there was war again. And David went out and fought with the
Philistines and struck them with a great blow, so that they fled before him.
9[†] z Then a harmful spirit from the LORD came upon Saul, as he sat in his
house with his spear in his hand. a And David was playing the lyre.
10[†] b And Saul sought to pin David to the wall with the spear, but he
eluded Saul, so that he struck the spear into the wall. And David fled and
escaped that night.
11 c Saul sent messengers to David’s house to watch him, that he might
kill him in the morning. But Michal, David’s wife, told him, “If you do not
escape with your life tonight, tomorrow you will be killed.” 12
d So Michal
let David down through the window, and he fled away and escaped.
13[†]Michal took e an image [1] and laid it on the bed and put a pillow of
goats’ hair at its head and covered it with the clothes. 14[†]And when Saul
sent messengers to take David, she said, “He is sick.” 15Then Saul sent the
messengers to see David, saying, “Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may
kill him.” 16And when the messengers came in, behold, e the image was in
the bed, with the pillow of goats’ hair at its head. 17Saul said to Michal,
“Why have you deceived me thus and let my enemy go, so that he has
escaped?” And Michal answered Saul, “He said to me, ‘Let me go. f Why
should I kill you?’”
18Now David fled and escaped, and he came to Samuel at g Ramah and
told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and lived at
Naioth. 19[†]And it was told Saul, “Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.”
20[†]Then Saul sent messengers to take David, and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as head over
them, h the Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul, i and they also
prophesied. 21When it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, i and they
also prophesied. And Saul sent messengers again the third time, i and they
also prophesied. 22Then he himself went to Ramah and came to the great
well that is in Secu. And he asked, “Where are Samuel and David?” And
one said, “Behold, they are at Naioth in g Ramah.” 23[†]And he went there
to Naioth in Ramah. j And the Spirit of God came upon him also, and as he
went he prophesied until he came to Naioth in Ramah. 24
k And he too
stripped off his clothes, and he too prophesied before Samuel and lay naked
all that day and all that night. Thus it is said, l “Is Saul also among the
prophets?”
Jonathan Warns David
1 SAMUEL 20 Then David fled from Naioth m in Ramah and came and said
before Jonathan, “What have I done? What is my guilt? And what is my sin
before your father, that he seeks my life?” 2And he said to him, “Far from
it! You shall not die. Behold, my father does nothing either great or small
without disclosing it to me. And why should my father hide this from me? It
is not so.” 3But David vowed again, saying, “Your father knows well that
n I have found favor in your eyes, and he thinks, ‘Do not let Jonathan know
this, lest he be grieved.’ But truly, o as the LORD lives and p as your soul
lives, there is but a step between me and death.” 4Then Jonathan said to
David, “Whatever you say, I will do for you.” 5[†]David said to Jonathan,
“Behold, tomorrow is q the new moon, and I should not fail to sit at table
with the king. But let me go, r that I may hide myself in the field till the
third day at evening. 6 s If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David
earnestly asked leave of me to run t to Bethlehem his city, for there is a
yearly u sacrifice there for all the clan.’ 7If he says, ‘Good!’ it will be well
with your servant, but if he is angry, then know that v harm is determined by
him. 8Therefore deal kindly with your servant, w for you have brought your
servant into a covenant of the LORD with you. x But if there is guilt in me,
kill me yourself, for why should you bring me to your father?” 9And
Jonathan said, “Far be it from you! If I knew that v it was determined by my
father that harm should come to you, would I not tell you?” 10Then David
said to Jonathan, “Who will tell me if your father answers you roughly?”
11And Jonathan said to David, “Come, let us go out into the field.” So they
both went out into the field.
12And Jonathan said to David, “The LORD, the God of Israel, be
witness! [1] When I have sounded out my father, about this time tomorrow,
or the third day, behold, if he is well disposed toward David, shall I not then
send and disclose it to you? 13But should it please my father to do you
harm, y the LORD do so to Jonathan and more also if I do not disclose it to
you and send you away, that you may go in safety. z May the LORD be with
you, as he has been with my father.
14If I am still alive, show me the
steadfast love of the LORD, that I may not die; 15[†] a and do not cut off [2]
your steadfast love from my house forever, when the LORD cuts off every
one of the enemies of David from the face of the earth.” 16And Jonathan
made a covenant with the house of David, saying, b “May [3] the LORD take
vengeance on David’s enemies.” 17And Jonathan made David swear again
by his love for him, c for he loved him as he loved his own soul.
18Then Jonathan said to him, d “Tomorrow is the new moon, and e you
will be missed, because f your seat will be empty.
19On the third day go
down quickly to the place where you hid yourself when the matter was in
hand, and remain beside the stone heap. [4] 20And I will shoot three arrows
to the side of it, as though I shot at a mark. 21And behold, I will send the
boy, saying, ‘Go, find the arrows.’ If I say to the boy, ‘Look, the arrows are
on this side of you, take them,’ then you are to come, for, g as the LORD
lives, it is safe for you and there is no danger.
22But if I say to the youth,
h ‘Look, the arrows are beyond you,’ then go, for the LORD has sent you
away.
23 i And as for the matter of which you and I have spoken, behold,
j the LORD is between you and me forever.”
24So David hid himself in the field. And when the new moon came, the
king sat down to eat food. 25The king sat on his seat, as at other times, on
the seat by the wall. Jonathan sat opposite, [5] and Abner sat by Saul’s side,
k but David’s place was empty.
26[†]Yet Saul did not say anything that day, for he thought, “Something
has happened to him. l He is not clean; surely he is not clean.” 27But on
m the second day, the day after the new moon, k David’s place was empty.
And Saul said to Jonathan his son, “Why has not the son of Jesse come to
the meal, either yesterday or today?” 28Jonathan answered Saul, n “David
earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem. 29[†]He said, ‘Let me go,
for our clan holds a sacrifice in the city, and my brother has commanded me
to be there. So now, if I have found favor in your eyes, let me get away and
see my brothers.’ For this reason he has not come to the king’s table.”
30Then Saul’s anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said to him,
“You son of a perverse, rebellious woman, do I not know that you have
chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame, and to the shame of your
mother’s nakedness? 31[†]For as long as the son of Jesse lives on the earth,
neither you nor your kingdom shall be established. Therefore send and
bring him to me, for he shall surely die.” 32Then Jonathan answered Saul
his father, o “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?” 33 p But
Saul hurled his spear at him to strike him. So Jonathan knew q that his
father was determined to put David to death. 34And Jonathan rose from the
table in fierce anger and ate no food the second day of the month, for he
was grieved for David, because his father had disgraced him.
35In the morning Jonathan went out into the field to the appointment with
David, and with him a little boy.
36And he said to his boy, “Run and find the
arrows that I shoot.” As the boy ran, he shot an arrow beyond him. 37And
when the boy came to the place of the arrow that Jonathan had shot,
Jonathan called after the boy and said, r “Is not the arrow beyond you?”
38And Jonathan called after the boy, “Hurry! Be quick! Do not stay!” So
Jonathan’s boy gathered up the arrows and came to his master.
39But the
boy knew nothing. Only Jonathan and David knew the matter.
40And
Jonathan gave his weapons to his boy and said to him, “Go and carry them
to the city.” 41And as soon as the boy had gone, David rose from beside the
stone heap [6] and fell on his face to the ground and bowed three times. And
they kissed one another and wept with one another, David weeping the
most. 42Then Jonathan said to David, s “Go in peace, because we have
sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying, t ‘The LORD shall be
between me and you, u and between my offspring and your offspring,
forever.’” And he rose and departed, and Jonathan went into the city. [7]
David and the Holy Bread