1 SAMUEL 25 [†] u Now Samuel died. And all Israel assembled v and
mourned for him, and they buried him w in his house at x Ramah.
David and Abigail
Then David rose and went down to y the wilderness of Paran. 2[†]And there
was a man in z Maon whose business was in a Carmel. The man was very
rich; he had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats. b He was shearing
his sheep in Carmel. 3[†]Now the name of the man was Nabal, and the
name of his wife Abigail. The woman was discerning and beautiful, but the
man was harsh and badly behaved; c he was a Calebite. 4[†]David heard in
the wilderness that Nabal b was shearing his sheep. 5So David sent ten
young men. And David said to the young men, “Go up to Carmel, and go to
Nabal and greet him in my name. 6And thus you shall greet him: d ‘Peace
be to you, and peace be to your house, and peace be to all that you have. 7I
hear that you have shearers. Now your shepherds have been with us, and we
did them no harm, e and they missed nothing all the time they were in
Carmel. 8Ask your young men, and they will tell you. Therefore let my
young men find favor in your eyes, for we come f on a feast day. Please
give whatever you have at hand to your servants and to your son David.’”
9When David’s young men came, they said all this to Nabal in the name
of David, and then they waited. 10[†]And Nabal answered David’s servants,
g “Who is David? Who is the son of Jesse? h There are many servants these
days who are breaking away from their masters. 11Shall I take i my bread
and my water and my meat that I have killed for my shearers and give it to
j men who come from I do not know where?” 12So David’s young men
turned away and came back and told him all this. 13And David said to his
men, “Every man strap on his sword!” And every man of them strapped on
his sword. David also strapped on his sword. And k about four hundred men
went up after David, k while two hundred l remained with the baggage.
14But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, “Behold, David
sent messengers out of the wilderness to greet our master, and he railed at
them. 15Yet the men were very good to us, and we suffered no harm, n and
we did not miss anything when we were in the fields, as long as we went
with them. 16They were o a wall to us both by night and by day, all the
while we were with them keeping the sheep. 17Now therefore know this and
consider what you should do, p for harm is determined against our master
and against all his house, and he is such q a worthless man that one cannot
speak to him.”
18Then Abigail made haste and took two hundred loaves and two skins of
wine and five sheep already prepared and five seahs [1] of parched grain and
a hundred clusters of raisins and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them
on donkeys. 19And she said to her young men, “Go on before me; behold, I
come after you.” But she did not tell her husband Nabal. 20And as she rode
on the donkey and came down under cover of the mountain, behold, David
and his men came down toward her, and she met them. 21Now David had
said, “Surely in vain have I guarded all that this fellow has in the
wilderness, r so that nothing was missed of all that belonged to him, and he
has s returned me evil for good. 22[†] t God do so to the enemies of David [2]
and more also, if by morning I leave so much as one male of all who belong
to him.”
23[†]When Abigail saw David, she hurried u and got down from the
donkey v and fell before David on her face and bowed to the ground. 24She
fell at his feet and said, w “On me alone, my lord, be the guilt. Please let
your servant speak in your ears, and hear the words of your servant. 25Let
not my lord regard q this worthless fellow, Nabal, for as his name is, so is
he. Nabal [3] is his name, and folly is with him. But I your servant did not
see the young men of my lord, whom you sent. 26Now then, my lord, x as
the LORD lives, and as your soul lives, because y the LORD has restrained
you from bloodguilt and from z saving with your own hand, now then a let
your enemies and those who seek to do evil to my lord be as Nabal. 27And
now let this b present that your servant has brought to my lord be given to
the young men who follow my lord. 28Please forgive the trespass of your
servant. For the LORD will certainly make my lord c a sure house, because
my lord d is fighting the battles of the LORD, and evil shall not be found in
you so long as you live. 29If men rise up to pursue you and to seek your life,
the life of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of the living in the care of
the LORD your God. And the lives of your enemies e he shall sling out as
from the hollow of a sling. 30And when the LORD has done to my lord
according to all the good that he has spoken concerning you and has
appointed you prince [4] over Israel, 31my lord shall have no cause of grief
or pangs of conscience for having shed blood without cause or for my lord
z working salvation himself. And when the LORD has dealt well with my
lord, then remember your servant.”
32[†]And David said to Abigail, f “Blessed be the LORD, the God of
Israel, who sent you this day to meet me! 33Blessed be your discretion, and
blessed be you, y who have kept me this day from bloodguilt z and from
working salvation with my own hand! 34For as surely g as the LORD, the
God of Israel, lives, y who has restrained me from hurting you, unless you
had hurried and come to meet me, truly by morning there had not been left
to Nabal so much as one male.” 35[†]Then David received from her hand
what she had brought him. And he said to her, h “Go up in peace to your
house. See, I have obeyed your voice, and I have granted your petition.”
36And Abigail came to Nabal, and behold, i he was holding a feast in his
house, like the feast of a king. And Nabal’s heart j was merry within him,
for he was very drunk. So she told him nothing k at all until the morning
light. 37[†]In the morning, when the wine had gone out of Nabal, his wife
told him these things, and his heart died within him, and he became as a
stone. 38And about ten days later l the LORD struck Nabal, and he died.
39When David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, f “Blessed be the
LORD who has m avenged the insult I received at the hand of Nabal, n and
has kept back his servant from wrongdoing. o The LORD has returned the
evil of Nabal on his own head.” Then David sent and p spoke to Abigail, to
take her as his wife. 40When the servants of David came to Abigail at
Carmel, they said to her, “David has sent us to you to take you to him as his
wife.” 41And she rose q and bowed with her face to the ground and said,
“Behold, your handmaid is a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my
lord.” 42And Abigail hurried and rose and mounted a donkey, and her five
young women attended her. She followed the messengers of David and
became his wife.
43[†]David also took Ahinoam of r Jezreel, s and both of them became his
wives. 44[†]Saul had given Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to Palti the
son of Laish, who was of Gallim.
David Spares Saul Again