1 SAMUEL 24 [†] [1] y When Saul returned from following the Philistines, he
was told, “Behold, David is in the wilderness of Engedi.” 2[†]Then Saul
took z three thousand chosen men out of all Israel and went to seek David
and his men in front of the Wildgoats’ Rocks. 3And he came to the
sheepfolds by the way, where there was a cave, and Saul went in a to relieve
himself. [2] Now David and his men were sitting in the innermost parts b of
the cave. 4And the men of David said to him, c “Here is the day of which
the LORD said to you, ‘Behold, I will give your enemy into your hand, and
you shall do to him as it shall seem good to you.’” Then David arose and
stealthily cut off a corner of Saul’s robe. 5And afterward d David’s heart
struck him, because he had cut off a corner of Saul’s robe. 6[†]He said to his
men, e “The LORD forbid that I should do this thing to my lord, the LORD’s
anointed, to put out my hand against him, seeing he is f the LORD’s
anointed.” 7So David persuaded his men with these words g and did not
permit them to attack Saul. And Saul rose up and left the cave and went on
his way.
8Afterward David also arose and went out of the cave, and called after
Saul, “My lord the king!” And when Saul looked behind him, David bowed
with his face to the earth and paid homage. 9And David said to Saul, “Why
do you listen to the words of men who say, ‘Behold, David seeks your
harm’? 10Behold, this day your eyes have seen how the LORD gave you
today into my hand in the cave. h And some told me to kill you, but I spared
you. [3] I said, ‘I will not put out my hand against my lord, f for he is the
LORD’s anointed.’ 11See, my father, see the corner of your robe in my hand.
For by the fact that I cut off the corner of your robe and did not kill you,
you may know and see that i there is no wrong or treason in my hands. I
have not sinned against you, though j you hunt my life to take it. 12[†] k May
the LORD judge between me and you, may the LORD avenge me against you,
but my hand shall not be against you. 13As the proverb of the ancients says,
‘Out of the wicked comes wickedness.’ But my hand shall not be against
you. 14After whom has the king of Israel come out? After whom do you
pursue? l After a dead dog! m After a flea! 15
k May the LORD therefore be
judge and give sentence between me and you, and see to it and n plead my
cause and deliver me from your hand.”
16As soon as David had finished speaking these words to Saul, Saul said,
o “Is this your voice, my son David?” And Saul lifted up his voice and
wept. 17He said to David, “You are more righteous than I, p for you have
repaid me good, whereas I have repaid you evil. 18And you have declared
this day how you have dealt well with me, in that you did not kill me when
the LORD put me into your hands. 19For if a man finds his enemy, will he let
him go away safe? So may the LORD reward you with good for what you
have done to me this day.
20[†]And now, behold, q I know that you shall
surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in your
hand. 21 r Swear to me therefore by the LORD that you will not cut off my
offspring after me, and s that you will not destroy my name out of my
father’s house.” 22[†]And David swore this to Saul. Then Saul went home,
but David and his men went up t to the stronghold.
The Death of Samuel