1 SAMUEL 22 [†]David departed from there and escaped to h the cave of
i Adullam. And when his brothers and all his father’s house heard it, they
went down there to him. 2[†] j And everyone who was in distress, and
everyone who was in debt, and everyone who was bitter in soul, [1] gathered
to him. And he became commander over them. And there were with him
k about four hundred men.
3And David went from there to Mizpeh of Moab. And he said to the king
of Moab, “Please let my father and my mother stay [2] with you, till I know
what God will do for me.” 4And he left them with the king of Moab, and
they stayed with him all the time that David was in the stronghold. 5[†]Then
the prophet l Gad said to David, “Do not remain in the stronghold; depart,
and go into the land of Judah.” So David departed and went into the forest
of Hereth.
Saul Kills the Priests at Nob
6[†]Now Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men who were with
him. Saul was sitting at Gibeah under m the tamarisk tree on the height with
his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him. 7And
Saul said to his servants who stood about him, “Hear now, people of
Benjamin; will the son of Jesse n give every one of you fields and
vineyards, will he make you all commanders of thousands and commanders
of hundreds, 8[†]that all of you have conspired against me? No one
discloses to me o when my son makes a covenant with the son of Jesse.
None of you p is sorry for me or discloses to me that my son has stirred up
my servant against me, q to lie in wait, as at this day.” 9Then answered
r Doeg the Edomite, who stood by the servants of Saul, “I saw the son of
Jesse s coming to Nob, to t Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, 10 u and he
inquired of the LORD for him and v gave him provisions and gave him the
sword of Goliath the Philistine.”
11Then the king sent to summon Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub,
and all his father’s house, the priests who were at Nob, and all of them
came to the king. 12And Saul said, “Hear now, son of Ahitub.” And he
answered, “Here I am, my lord.” 13And Saul said to him, “Why have you
conspired against me, you and the son of Jesse, in that you have given him
bread and a sword and u have inquired of God for him, so that he has risen
against me, w to lie in wait, as at this day?” 14Then Ahimelech answered the
king, “And who among all your servants is so faithful as David, who is the
king’s son-in-law, and captain over [3] your bodyguard, and honored in your
house? 15Is today the first time u that I have inquired of God for him? No!
Let not the king impute anything to his servant or to all the house of my
father, for your servant has known nothing of all this, x much or little.”
16And the king said, “You shall surely die, Ahimelech, you and all your
father’s house.” 17And the king said to y the guard who stood about him,
“Turn and kill the priests of the LORD, because their hand also is with
David, and they knew that he fled and did not disclose it to me.” But the
servants of the king would not put out their hand to strike the priests of the
LORD.
18Then the king said to Doeg, “You turn and strike the priests.” And
Doeg the Edomite turned and struck down the priests, z and he killed on that
day eighty-five persons who wore the linen ephod. 19[†]And Nob, the city
of the priests, he put to the sword; a both man and woman, child and infant,
ox, donkey and sheep, he put to the sword.
20[†]But one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named
b Abiathar, escaped and fled after David. 21And Abiathar told David that
Saul had killed the priests of the LORD.
22And David said to Abiathar, “I
knew on that day, c when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely
tell Saul. I have occasioned the death of all the persons of your father’s
house. 23 d Stay with me; do not be afraid, for he who seeks my life seeks
your life. With me you shall be in safekeeping.”
David Saves the City of Keilah