1 SAMUEL 1 [†]There was a certain man of a Ramathaim-zophim of b the
hill country of Ephraim whose name was Elkanah the son of Jeroham, son
of Elihu, son of Tohu, son of Zuph, c an Ephrathite. 2[†]He had two wives.
The name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other, Peninnah. And
Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.
3[†]Now this man used to go up d year by year from his city e to worship
and to sacrifice to the LORD of hosts f at Shiloh, where the two sons of Eli,
Hophni and Phinehas, were priests of the LORD.
4[†]On the day when
Elkanah sacrificed, g he would give portions to Peninnah his wife and to all
her sons and daughters. 5But to Hannah he gave a double portion, because
he loved her, though the LORD had closed her womb. [1] 6And her rival used
to provoke her grievously to irritate her, because the LORD had closed her
womb. 7[†]So it went on year by year. As often as she went up to the house
of the LORD, she used to provoke her. Therefore Hannah wept and would
not eat. 8[†]And Elkanah, her husband, said to her, “Hannah, why do you
weep? And why do you not eat? And why is your heart sad? h Am I not
more to you than ten sons?”
9[†]After they had eaten and drunk in Shiloh, Hannah rose. Now Eli the
priest was sitting on the seat beside the doorpost of i the temple of the
LORD.
10She was j deeply distressed and prayed to the LORD and wept
bitterly.
11[†]And she k vowed a vow and said, “O LORD of hosts, if you will
indeed l look on the affliction of your servant and m remember me and not
forget your servant, but will give to your servant a son, then I will give him
to the LORD all the days of his life, n and no razor shall touch his head.”
12[†]As she continued praying before the LORD, Eli observed her mouth.
13Hannah was speaking in her heart; only her lips moved, and her voice was
not heard. Therefore Eli took her to be a drunken woman. 14And Eli said to
her, “How long will you go on being drunk? Put your wine away from
you.” 15But Hannah answered, “No, my lord, I am a woman troubled in
spirit. I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but o I have been pouring
out my soul before the LORD.
16Do not regard your servant as p a worthless
woman, for all along I have been speaking out of my great anxiety and
vexation.” 17Then Eli answered, q “Go in peace, and the God of Israel
r grant your petition that you have made to him.” 18And she said, s “Let
your servant find favor in your eyes.” Then the woman t went her way and
ate, and her face was no longer sad.
19They rose early in the morning and worshiped before the LORD; then
they went back to their house at u Ramah. And Elkanah knew Hannah his
wife, and the LORD v remembered her.
20[†]And in due time Hannah
conceived and bore a son, and she called his name Samuel, for she said, “I
have asked for him from the LORD.” [2]
Samuel Given to the LORD
21The man Elkanah and all his house w went up to offer to the LORD the
yearly sacrifice and to pay his vow.
22But Hannah did not go up, for she
said to her husband, “As soon as the child is weaned, I will bring him, so
that he may appear in the presence of the LORD x and dwell there forever.”
23 y Elkanah her husband said to her, “Do what seems best to you; wait until
you have weaned him; z only, may the LORD establish his word.” So the
woman remained and nursed her son until she weaned him. 24[†]And when
she had weaned him, a she took him up with her, along with a three-year-
old bull, [3] an ephah [4] of flour, and a skin of wine, and she brought him to
b the house of the LORD at Shiloh. And the child was young. 25Then they
slaughtered the bull, and they brought the child to Eli. 26[†]And she said,
“Oh, my lord! c As you live, my lord, I am the woman who was standing
here in your presence, praying to the LORD.
27[†]For this child I prayed,
d and the LORD has granted me my petition that I made to him. 28Therefore I
have lent him to the LORD. As long as he lives, he is lent to the LORD.”
e And he worshiped the LORD there.
Hannah’s Prayer