1 SAMUEL 3 [†] f Now the boy Samuel was ministering to the LORD in the
presence of Eli. g And the word of the LORD was rare in those days; there
was no frequent vision.
2At that time Eli, h whose eyesight had begun to grow dim so that he
could not see, was lying down in his own place. 3[†] i The lamp of God had
not yet gone out, and Samuel was lying down j in the temple of the LORD,
where the ark of God was.
4Then the LORD called Samuel, and he said, “Here I am!” 5and ran to Eli
and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said, “I did not call; lie
down again.” So he went and lay down.
6And the LORD called again, “Samuel!” and Samuel arose and went to Eli
and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said, “I did not call, my
son; lie down again.” 7[†]Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, and the
word of the LORD had not yet been revealed to him.
8And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and
went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” Then Eli perceived
that the LORD was calling the boy.
9Therefore Eli said to Samuel, “Go, lie
down, and if he calls you, you shall say, ‘Speak, LORD, for your servant
hears.’” So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
10[†]And the LORD came and stood, calling as at other times, “Samuel!
Samuel!” And Samuel said, “Speak, for your servant hears.” 11Then the
LORD said to Samuel, “Behold, I am about to do a thing in Israel k at which
the two ears of everyone who hears it will tingle. 12[†]On that day I will
fulfill against Eli l all that I have spoken concerning his house, from
beginning to end. 13 l And I declare to him that I am about to punish his
house forever, for the iniquity that he knew, m because his sons were
blaspheming God, [1] n and he did not restrain them. 14[†]Therefore I swear
to the house of Eli o that the iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be atoned for
by sacrifice or offering forever.”
15Samuel lay until morning; then he opened the doors of the house of the
LORD. And Samuel was afraid to tell the vision to Eli. 16But Eli called
Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son.” And he said, “Here I am.” 17[†]And Eli
said, “What was it that he told you? Do not hide it from me. p May God do
so to you and more also if you hide anything from me of all that he told
you.” 18[†]So Samuel told him everything and hid nothing from him. And
he said, q “It is the LORD. Let him do what seems good to him.”
19[†] r And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him s and let none of his
words fall to the ground. 20[†]And all Israel t from Dan to Beersheba knew
that Samuel was established as a prophet of the LORD.
21And the LORD
appeared again at Shiloh, for the LORD revealed himself to Samuel u at
Shiloh v by the word of the LORD.
The Philistines Capture the Ark