1 SAMUEL 17 [†]Now the Philistines v gathered their armies for battle. And
they were gathered at w Socoh, which belongs to Judah, and encamped
between Socoh and x Azekah, in y Ephes-dammim. 2And Saul and the men
of Israel were gathered, and encamped in z the Valley of Elah, and drew up
in line of battle against the Philistines. 3And the Philistines stood on the
mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on the mountain on the other
side, with a valley between them. 4[†]And there came out from the camp of
the Philistines a champion named a Goliath of b Gath, whose height was
six [1] cubits [2] and a span. 5He had a helmet of bronze on his head, and he
was armed with a coat of mail, and the weight of the coat was five thousand
shekels [3] of bronze. 6And he had bronze armor on his legs, and a c javelin
of bronze slung between his shoulders. 7The shaft of his spear was like a
weaver’s beam, and his spear’s head weighed six hundred shekels of iron.
d And his shield-bearer went before him. 8He stood and shouted to the ranks
of Israel, “Why have you come out to draw up for battle? Am I not a
Philistine, and e are you not servants of Saul? Choose a man for yourselves,
and let him come down to me. 9If he is able to fight with me and kill me,
then we will be your servants. But if I prevail against him and kill him, then
you shall be our servants f and serve us.” 10And the Philistine said, g “I defy
the ranks of Israel this day. Give me a man, that we may fight together.”
11[†]When Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistine, they were
dismayed and greatly afraid.
12[†]Now David was h the son of an i Ephrathite of Bethlehem in Judah,
j named Jesse, k who had eight sons. In the days of Saul the man was
already old and advanced in years. [4] 13The three oldest sons of Jesse had
followed Saul to the battle. And l the names of his three sons who went to
the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next to him Abinadab, and the third
Shammah. 14
m David was the youngest. The three eldest followed Saul,
15but David went back and forth from Saul n to feed his father’s sheep at
Bethlehem. 16For forty days the Philistine came forward and took his stand,
morning and evening.
17And Jesse said to David his son, “Take for your brothers an ephah [5] of
this parched grain, and these ten loaves, and carry them quickly to the camp
to your brothers. 18[†] o Also take these ten cheeses to the commander of
their thousand. p See if your brothers are well, and bring some token from
them.”
19Now Saul and they and all the men of Israel were in the Valley of Elah,
fighting with the Philistines. 20And David rose early in the morning and left
the sheep with a keeper and took the provisions and went, as Jesse had
commanded him. And he came to q the encampment as the host was going
out to the battle line, shouting the war cry.
21And Israel and the Philistines
drew up for battle, army against army.
22And David left the r things in
charge of the keeper of the r baggage and ran to the ranks and went and
greeted his brothers. 23As he talked with them, behold, s the champion, the
Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, came up out of the ranks of the
Philistines and spoke t the same words as before. And David heard him.
24All the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him and were
much afraid. 25[†]And the men of Israel said, “Have you seen this man who
has come up? Surely he has come up to u defy Israel. And the king will
enrich the man who kills him with great riches v and will give him his
daughter and make his father’s house free in Israel.” 26And David said to
the men who stood by him, “What shall be done for the man who kills this
Philistine and takes away w the reproach from Israel? For who is this
x uncircumcised Philistine, that he should u defy the armies of y the living
God?” 27And the people answered him in the same way, z “So shall it be
done to the man who kills him.”
28Now Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spoke to the men. And
Eliab’s anger was kindled against David, and he said, “Why have you come
down? And with whom have you left those few sheep in the wilderness? I
know your presumption and the evil of your heart, for you have come down
to see the battle.” 29And David said, “What have I done now? Was it not but
a word?” 30And he turned away from him toward another, and spoke b in
the same way, and the people answered him again as before.
31When the words that David spoke were heard, they repeated them
before Saul, and he sent for him. 32And David said to Saul, c “Let no man’s
heart fail because of him. d Your servant will go and fight with this
Philistine.” 33And Saul said to David, “You are not able to go against this
Philistine to fight with him, for you are but a youth, and he has been a man
of war from his youth.” 34[†]But David said to Saul, “Your servant used to
keep sheep for his father. And when there came a lion, or a bear, and took a
lamb from the flock, 35I went after him and struck him and delivered it out
of his mouth. And if he arose against me, I caught him by his beard and
struck him and killed him. 36Your servant has struck down both lions and
bears, and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be like one of them, e for he
has defied the armies of the living God.” 37And David said, f “The LORD
who delivered me from the paw of the lion and from the paw of the bear
will deliver me from the hand of this Philistine.” And Saul said to David,
“Go, g and the LORD be with you!”
38Then Saul clothed David with his armor. He put a helmet of bronze on
his head and clothed him with a coat of mail, 39and David strapped his
sword over his armor. And he tried in vain to go, for he had not tested them.
Then David said to Saul, “I cannot go with these, for I have not tested
them.” So David put them off. 40Then he took his staff in his hand and
chose five smooth stones from the brook and put them in his shepherd’s
pouch. His sling was in his hand, and he approached the Philistine.
41And the Philistine moved forward and came near to David, h with his
shield-bearer in front of him. 42And when the Philistine looked and saw
David, he disdained him, for he was but a youth, i ruddy and handsome in
appearance. 43[†]And the Philistine said to David, “Am I j a dog, that you
come to me with sticks?” And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
44[†]The Philistine said to David, “Come to me, and I will give your flesh
k to the birds of the air and to the beasts of the field.” 45Then David said to
the Philistine, “You come to me with a sword and with a spear and with l a
javelin, but I come to you in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the
armies of Israel, e whom you have defied. 46This day the LORD will deliver
you into my hand, and I will strike you down and cut off your head. m And I
will give the dead bodies of the host of the Philistines this day n to the birds
of the air and to the wild beasts of the earth, o that all the earth may know
that there is a God in Israel, 47and that all this assembly may know that p the
LORD saves not with sword and spear. q For the battle is the LORD’s, and he
will give you into our hand.”
48When the Philistine arose and came and drew near to meet David,
David ran quickly toward the battle line to meet the Philistine. 49And David
put his hand in his bag and took out a stone and slung it and struck the
Philistine on his forehead. The stone sank into his forehead, and he fell on
his face to the ground.
50So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone,
and struck the Philistine and killed him. There was no sword in the hand of
David. 51Then David ran and stood over the Philistine r and took his sword
and drew it out of its sheath and killed him and cut off his head with it.
When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, s they fled.
52[†]And the men of Israel and Judah rose with a shout and pursued the
Philistines as far as Gath [6] and the gates of t Ekron, so that the wounded
Philistines fell on the way from u Shaaraim as far as v Gath and Ekron.
53And the people of Israel came back from chasing the Philistines, and they
plundered their camp. 54[†]And David took w the head of the Philistine
x and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put his armor in his tent.
55[†]As soon as Saul saw David go out against the Philistine, he said to
Abner, y the commander of the army, “Abner, z whose son is this youth?”
And Abner said, a “As your soul lives, O king, I do not know.” 56And the
king said, “Inquire whose son the boy is.” 57And as soon as David returned
from the striking down of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him
before Saul b with the head of the Philistine in his hand. 58And Saul said to
him, “Whose son are you, young man?” And David answered, c “I am the
son of your servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.”
David and Jonathan’s Friendship
1 SAMUEL 18 As soon as he had finished speaking to Saul, the soul of
Jonathan was knit to the soul of David, and Jonathan d loved him as his own
soul. 2[†]And Saul took him that day e and would not let him return to his
father’s house. 3[†]Then Jonathan made a covenant with David, because
d he loved him as his own soul. 4And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe
that was on him and gave it to David, and his armor, and even his sword
and his bow and his belt. 5And David went out f and was successful
wherever Saul sent him, so that Saul set him over the men of war. And this
was good in the sight of all the people and also in the sight of Saul’s
servants.
Saul’s Jealousy of David
6[†]As they were coming home, when David returned from striking down
the Philistine, g the women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and
dancing, to meet King Saul, with tambourines, with songs of joy, and with
musical instruments. [1] 7[†]And the women h sang to one another as they
celebrated,
i “Saul has struck down his thousands,
and David his ten thousands.”
8And Saul was very angry, and this saying displeased him. He said, “They
have ascribed to David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed
thousands, and what more can he have but j the kingdom?” 9And Saul eyed
David from that day on.
10The next day k a harmful spirit from God rushed upon Saul, and l he
raved within his house while David was m playing the lyre, as he did day by
day. n Saul had his spear in his hand. 11And Saul o hurled the spear, for he
thought, “I will pin David to the wall.” But David evaded him twice.
12 p Saul was afraid of David because q the LORD was with him r but had
departed from Saul. 13So Saul removed him from his presence and made
him a commander of a thousand. s And he went out and came in before the
people. 14And David t had success in all his undertakings, q for the LORD
was with him. 15And when Saul saw that t he had great success, he stood in
fearful awe of him. 16
u But all Israel and Judah loved David, for he went out
and came in before them.
David Marries Michal
17[†]Then Saul said to David, “Here is v my elder daughter Merab. w I will
give her to you for a wife. Only be valiant for me x and fight the LORD’s
battles.” For Saul thought, “Let not my hand be against him, y but let the
hand of the Philistines be against him.” 18[†]And David said to Saul,
z “Who am I, and who are my relatives, my father’s clan in Israel, that I
should be son-in-law to the king?” 19But at the time when Merab, Saul’s
daughter, should have been given to David, she was given to a Adriel the
b Meholathite for a wife.
20[†]Now v Saul’s daughter Michal c loved David. And they told Saul,
and the thing pleased him. 21Saul thought, “Let me give her to him, that she
may d be a snare for him e and that the hand of the Philistines may be
against him.” Therefore Saul said to David a second time, [2] f “You shall
now be my son-in-law.” 22And Saul commanded his servants, “Speak to
David in private and say, ‘Behold, the king has delight in you, and all his
servants love you. Now then become the king’s son-in-law.’” 23And Saul’s
servants spoke those words in the ears of David. And David said, g “Does it
seem to you a little thing to become the king’s son-in-law, since I am a poor
man and have no reputation?” 24And the servants of Saul told him, “Thus
and so did David speak.” 25[†]Then Saul said, “Thus shall you say to David,
‘The king desires no h bride-price except a hundred foreskins of the
Philistines, i that he may be avenged of the king’s enemies.’” j Now Saul
thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines. 26And when his
servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king’s son-
in-law. k Before the time had expired, 27David arose and went, l along with
his men, and killed two hundred of the Philistines. m And David brought
their foreskins, which were given in full number to the king, that he might
become the king’s son-in-law. And Saul gave him his daughter Michal for a
wife. 28But when Saul saw and knew that n the LORD was with David, o and
that Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved him, 29Saul was even more afraid of
David. So Saul was David’s enemy continually.
30 p Then the commanders of the Philistines came out to battle, and as
often as they came out q David had more success than all the servants of
Saul, so that his name was highly esteemed.
Saul Tries to Kill David