2 CHRONICLES 16 [†] v In the w thirty-sixth year of the reign of Asa, Baasha
king of Israel went up against Judah and built Ramah, x that he might
permit no one to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah. 2[†]Then Asa took
silver and gold from the treasures of the house of the LORD and the king’s
house and sent them to Ben-hadad king of Syria, who lived in Damascus,
saying, 3“There is a covenant [1] between me and you, as there was between
my father and your father. Behold, I am sending to you silver and gold. Go,
break your covenant with Baasha king of Israel, that he may withdraw from
me.” 4And Ben-hadad listened to King Asa and sent the commanders of his
armies against the cities of Israel, and they conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel-
maim, and all the y store cities of Naphtali. 5And when Baasha heard of it,
he stopped building Ramah and let his work cease. 6Then King Asa took all
Judah, and they carried away the stones of Ramah and its timber, with
which Baasha had been building, and with them he built Geba and Mizpah.
7[†]At that time z Hanani a the seer came to Asa king of Judah and said to
him, b “Because you relied on the king of Syria, and did not rely on the
LORD your God, the army of the king of Syria has escaped you. 8Were not
c the Ethiopians and d the Libyans a huge army with very many chariots and
horsemen? Yet e because you relied on the LORD, he gave them into your
hand. 9 f For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole earth,
to give strong support to those g whose heart is blameless [2] toward him.
h You have done foolishly in this, for from now on i you will have wars.”
10[†]Then Asa was angry with the seer and put him j in the stocks in prison,
for he was in a rage with him because of this. And Asa inflicted cruelties
upon some of the people at the same time.
11[†] k The acts of Asa, from first to last, are written in the Book of the
Kings of Judah and Israel. 12In the thirty-ninth year of his reign Asa was
diseased in his feet, and his disease became severe. Yet even in his disease
he did not seek the LORD, but sought help from physicians. 13[†]And Asa
slept with his fathers, dying in the forty-first year of his reign. 14They
buried him in the tomb that he had cut for himself in the city of David. They
laid him on a bier l that had been filled with various kinds of spices
prepared by the perfumer’s art, m and they made a very great fire in his
honor.
Jehoshaphat Reigns in Judah