2 CHRONICLES 32 [†] i After these things and these acts of faithfulness,
Sennacherib king of Assyria came and invaded Judah and encamped against
the fortified cities, thinking to win them for himself. 2And when Hezekiah
saw that Sennacherib had come and intended to fight against Jerusalem, 3he
planned with his officers and his mighty men to stop the water of the
springs that were outside the city; and they helped him. 4A great many
people were gathered, and they stopped all the springs and j the brook that
flowed through the land, saying, “Why should the kings of Assyria come
and find much water?” 5[†]He set to work resolutely and built up k all the
wall that was broken down and raised towers upon it, [1] and outside it he
built another wall, and he strengthened the l Millo in the city of David. He
also made weapons and shields in abundance. 6And he set combat
commanders over the people and gathered them together to him in the
square at the gate of the city and spoke m encouragingly to them, saying,
7 n “Be strong and courageous. o Do not be afraid or dismayed before the
king of Assyria and all the horde that is with him, p for there are more with
us than with him. 8With him is q an arm of flesh, r but with us is the LORD
our God, to help us and to fight our battles.” And the people took
confidence from the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.
Sennacherib Blasphemes
9[†]After this, Sennacherib king of Assyria, who was besieging Lachish
with all his forces, sent his servants to Jerusalem to Hezekiah king of Judah
and to all the people of Judah who were in Jerusalem, saying, 10“Thus says
Sennacherib king of Assyria, ‘On what are you trusting, that you endure the
siege in Jerusalem? 11Is not Hezekiah misleading you, that he may give you
over to die by famine and by thirst, when he tells you, “The LORD our God
will deliver us from the hand of the king of Assyria”? 12
s Has not this same
Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars and commanded Judah
and Jerusalem, “Before one altar you shall worship, and on it you shall burn
your sacrifices”? 13Do you not know what I and my fathers have done to all
the peoples of other lands? Were the gods of the nations of those lands at all
able to deliver their lands out of my hand? 14Who among all the gods of
those nations that my fathers devoted to destruction was able to deliver his
people from my hand, that your God should be able to deliver you from my
hand? 15Now, therefore, do not let Hezekiah deceive you or mislead you in
this fashion, and do not believe him, for no god of any nation or kingdom
has been able to deliver his people from my hand or from the hand of my
fathers. How much less will your God deliver you out of my hand!’”
16And his servants said still more against the LORD God and against his
servant Hezekiah. 17And he wrote letters to cast contempt on the LORD, the
God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, “Like the gods of the
nations of the lands who have not delivered their people from my hands, so
the God of Hezekiah will not deliver his people from my hand.” 18[†]And
they shouted it with a loud voice in the language of Judah to the people of
Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten and terrify them, in order that
they might take the city.
19And they spoke of the God of Jerusalem as they
spoke of the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of men’s
hands.
The LORD Delivers Jerusalem
20[†]Then Hezekiah the king and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz,
prayed because of this and cried to heaven. 21[†]And the LORD sent an
angel, who cut off all the mighty warriors and commanders and officers in
the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with t shame of face to his
own land. And when he came into the house of his god, some of his own
sons struck him down there with the sword. 22So the LORD saved Hezekiah
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib king of
Assyria and from the hand of all his enemies, and he provided for them on
every side. 23And many u brought gifts to the LORD to Jerusalem and
precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah, so that he was exalted in the
sight of all nations from that time onward.
Hezekiah’s Pride and Achievements
24[†] v In those days Hezekiah became sick and was at the point of death,
and he prayed to the LORD, and he answered him and gave him a sign. 25But
Hezekiah w did not make return according to the benefit done to him, for
x his heart was proud. Therefore y wrath came upon him and Judah and
Jerusalem. 26But Hezekiah z humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both
he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the LORD did not
come upon them in the days of Hezekiah.
27[†]And Hezekiah had very great riches and honor, and he made for
himself treasuries for silver, for gold, for precious stones, for spices, for
shields, and for all kinds of a costly vessels; 28storehouses also for the yield
of grain, wine, and oil; and stalls for all kinds of cattle, and sheepfolds.
29He likewise provided cities for himself, and flocks and herds in
abundance, for God had given him very great possessions. 30This same
Hezekiah b closed the upper outlet of the waters of c Gihon and directed
them down to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in
all his works. 31And so in the matter of the envoys of the princes of
Babylon, d who had been sent to him to inquire about e the sign that had
been done in the land, God left him to himself, f in order to test him and to
know all that was in his heart.
32[†]Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and his good deeds, behold,
they are written g in the vision of Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, h in
the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. 33And Hezekiah slept with his
fathers, and they buried him in the i upper part of the tombs of the sons of
David, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his
death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his place.
Manasseh Reigns in Judah