2 CHRONICLES 35 [†] g Josiah kept a Passover to the LORD in Jerusalem. And
they slaughtered the Passover lamb h on the fourteenth day of the first
month. 2He appointed the priests to their offices i and encouraged them in
the service of the house of the LORD.
3[†]And he said to the Levites j who
taught all Israel and who were holy to the LORD, “Put the holy ark in the
house that Solomon the son of David, king of Israel, built. You need not
carry it on your shoulders. Now serve the LORD your God and his people
Israel. 4Prepare yourselves k according to your fathers’ houses by your
divisions, l as prescribed in the writing of David king of Israel m and the
document of Solomon his son. 5And n stand in the Holy Place o according
to the groupings of the fathers’ houses of your brothers the lay people, and
according to the division of the Levites by fathers’ household. 6And
slaughter the Passover lamb, and p consecrate yourselves, and prepare for
your brothers, to do according to the word of the LORD by Moses.”
7[†]Then Josiah contributed to the lay people, as Passover offerings for
all who were present, lambs and young goats from the flock to the number
of 30,000, and 3,000 bulls; q these were from the king’s possessions. 8And
his officials contributed willingly to the people, to the priests, and to the
Levites. r Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, the chief officers of the house of
God, gave to the priests for the Passover offerings 2,600 Passover lambs
and 300 bulls. 9Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanel his brothers,
and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, gave to the
Levites for the Passover offerings 5,000 lambs and young goats and 500
bulls.
10When the service had been prepared for, the priests s stood in their
place, t and the Levites in their divisions according to the king’s command.
11 u And they slaughtered the Passover lamb, and the priests v threw the
blood that they received from them w while the Levites flayed the sacrifices.
12And they set aside the burnt offerings that they might distribute them
according to the groupings of the fathers’ houses of the lay people, to offer
to the LORD, as it is written in the Book of Moses. And so they did with the
bulls. 13 x And they roasted the Passover lamb with fire according to the
rule; and they y boiled the holy offerings in pots, in cauldrons, and in pans,
and carried them quickly to all the lay people. 14And afterward they
prepared for themselves and for the priests, because the priests, the sons of
Aaron, were offering the burnt offerings and the fat parts until night; so the
Levites prepared for themselves and for the priests, the sons of Aaron.
15The singers, the sons of Asaph, were in their place z according to the
command of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s a seer;
b and the gatekeepers were at each gate. They did not need to depart from
their service, for their brothers the Levites prepared for them.
16So all the service of the LORD was prepared that day, to keep the
Passover and to offer burnt offerings on the altar of the LORD, according to
the command of King Josiah. 17And the people of Israel who were present
kept the Passover at that time, c and the Feast of Unleavened Bread seven
days. 18[†] d No Passover like it had been kept in Israel since the days of
Samuel the prophet. None of the kings of Israel had kept such a Passover as
was kept by Josiah, and the priests and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel
who were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 19In the eighteenth year
of the reign of Josiah this Passover was kept.
Josiah Killed in Battle
20[†] e After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Neco king of
Egypt went up to fight at f Carchemish on the Euphrates, and Josiah went
out to meet him. 21But he sent envoys to him, saying, “What have we to do
with each other, king of Judah? I am not coming against you this day, but
against the house with which I am at war. And God has commanded me to
hurry. Cease opposing God, who is with me, lest he destroy you.”
22Nevertheless, Josiah did not turn away from him, but g disguised himself
in order to fight with him. He did not listen to the words of Neco from the
mouth of God, but came to fight in the plain of h Megiddo. 23And the
archers shot King Josiah. And the king said to his servants, i “Take me
away, for I am badly wounded.” 24So his servants took him out of the
chariot and carried him in his second chariot and brought him to Jerusalem.
And he died and was buried in the tombs of his fathers. j All Judah and
Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 25
k Jeremiah also uttered a lament for Josiah;
and all l the singing men and singing women have spoken of Josiah in their
laments to this day. They made these a rule in Israel; behold, they are
written in the Laments. 26Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his good
deeds according to what is written in the Law of the LORD,
27and his acts,
first and last, behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and
Judah.
Judah’s Decline