2 CHRONICLES 26 [†]And all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was
sixteen years old, and made him king instead of his father Amaziah. 2[†]He
built Eloth and restored it to Judah, after the king slept with his fathers.
3[†]Uzziah was e sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
4And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his
father Amaziah had done. 5[†]He set himself to seek God f in the days of
Zechariah, g who instructed him in the fear of God, and as long as he sought
the LORD, God made him prosper.
6[†]He went out and h made war against the Philistines and broke through
the wall of Gath and the wall of Jabneh and the wall of Ashdod, and he built
cities in the territory of Ashdod and elsewhere among the Philistines. 7God
helped him i against the Philistines and against the Arabians who lived in
Gurbaal and against the j Meunites. 8The Ammonites k paid tribute to
Uzziah, and his fame spread even to the border of Egypt, for he became
very strong. 9[†]Moreover, Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at l the Corner
Gate and at m the Valley Gate and at n the Angle, and fortified them. 10And
he built towers in the wilderness and o cut out many cisterns, for he had
large herds, both in the Shephelah and in the plain, and he had farmers and
vinedressers in the hills and in the fertile lands, for he loved the soil.
11Moreover, Uzziah had an army of soldiers, fit for war, in divisions
according to the numbers in the muster made by Jeiel the secretary and
Maaseiah the officer, under the direction of Hananiah, one of the king’s
commanders. 12The whole number of the heads of fathers’ houses of mighty
men of valor was 2,600. 13Under their command was an army of p 307,500,
who could make war with mighty power, to help the king against the
enemy.
14And Uzziah prepared for all the army shields, spears, helmets,
q coats of mail, bows, and stones for slinging. 15In Jerusalem he made
machines, invented by skillful men, to be on the towers and the corners, to
shoot arrows and great stones. And his fame spread far, for he was
marvelously helped, till he was strong.
Uzziah’s Pride and Punishment
16[†]But when r he was strong, s he grew proud, to his destruction. For he
was unfaithful to the LORD his God and entered the temple of the LORD to
burn incense on the altar of incense. 17But t Azariah the priest went in after
him, with eighty priests of the LORD who were men of valor,
18and they
withstood King Uzziah and said to him, u “It is not for you, Uzziah, to burn
incense to the LORD, v but for the priests, the sons of Aaron, who are
consecrated to burn incense. Go out of the sanctuary, for you have done
wrong, and it will bring you no honor from the LORD God.” 19Then Uzziah
was angry. Now he had a censer in his hand to burn incense, and when he
became angry with the priests, w leprosy [1] broke out on his forehead in the
presence of the priests in the house of the LORD, by the altar of incense.
20And Azariah the chief priest and all the priests looked at him, and behold,
he was leprous in his forehead! And they rushed him out quickly, and he
himself hurried to go out, because the LORD had struck him. 21[†] x And
King Uzziah was a leper to the day of his death, and being a leper lived y in
a separate house, for he was excluded from the house of the LORD. And
Jotham his son was over the king’s household, governing the people of the
land.
22[†]Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, from first to last, z Isaiah the
prophet the son of Amoz wrote. 23And Uzziah slept with his fathers, and
they buried him with his fathers in the burial field that belonged to the
kings, for they said, “He is a leper.” And Jotham his son reigned in his
place.
Jotham Reigns in Judah