2 CHRONICLES 30 [†]Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters
also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the
LORD at Jerusalem to keep the Passover to the LORD, the God of Israel.
2[†]For the king and his princes and all the assembly in Jerusalem had taken
counsel to keep the Passover a in the second month— 3for they could not
keep it b at that time c because the priests had not consecrated themselves in
sufficient number, nor had the people assembled in Jerusalem— 4and the
plan seemed right to the king and all the assembly.
5So they decreed to
make a proclamation throughout all Israel, d from Beersheba to Dan, that
the people should come and keep the Passover to the LORD, the God of
Israel, at Jerusalem, for they had not kept it as often as prescribed. 6[†] e So
couriers went throughout all Israel and Judah with letters from the king and
his princes, as the king had commanded, saying, “O people of Israel,
f return to the LORD, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, that he may turn
again to the remnant of you who have escaped from the hand of g the kings
of Assyria. 7 h Do not be like your fathers and your brothers, who were
faithless to the LORD God of their fathers, so that he made them a
desolation, as you see. 8 i Do not now be stiff-necked as your fathers were,
but yield yourselves to the LORD and come to his sanctuary, which he has
consecrated forever, and serve the LORD your God, j that his fierce anger
may turn away from you. 9For f if you return to the LORD, your brothers and
your children k will find compassion with their captors and return to this
land. For l the LORD your God is gracious and merciful and will not turn
away his face from you, m if you return to him.”
10 e So the couriers went from city to city through the country of
n Ephraim and Manasseh, and as far as Zebulun, but o they laughed them to
scorn and mocked them. 11[†]However, p some men of Asher, of Manasseh,
and of Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. 12The hand of
God was also on Judah to give them one heart to do what the king and the
princes commanded q by the word of the LORD.
13And many people came together in Jerusalem to keep the Feast of
Unleavened Bread r in the second month, a very great assembly.
14They set
to work and removed s the altars that were in Jerusalem, and all the altars
for burning incense they took away t and threw into the brook Kidron.
15 u And they slaughtered the Passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the
second month. v And the priests and the Levites were ashamed, w so that
they consecrated themselves and brought burnt offerings into the house of
the LORD.
16
x They took their accustomed posts according to the Law of
Moses y the man of God. The priests threw the blood that they received
from the hand of the Levites. 17[†]For there were many in the assembly who
had not consecrated themselves. Therefore the Levites had to slaughter the
Passover lamb for everyone who was not clean, to consecrate it to the
LORD.
18[†]For a majority of the people, z many of them from Ephraim,
Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet they ate
the Passover otherwise a than as prescribed. For Hezekiah had prayed for
them, saying, “May the good LORD pardon everyone 19
b who sets his heart
to seek God, the LORD, the God of his fathers, even though not according to
the sanctuary’s rules of cleanness.” [1] 20And the LORD heard Hezekiah and
healed the people. 21And the people of Israel who were present at Jerusalem
kept c the Feast of Unleavened Bread seven days with great gladness, and
the Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by day, singing with all
their might [2] to the LORD.
22And Hezekiah spoke d encouragingly to all the
Levites who showed good skill in the service of the LORD. So they ate the
food of the festival for seven days, sacrificing e peace offerings and giving
thanks to the LORD, the God of their fathers.
23[†]Then the whole assembly agreed together to keep the feast f for
another seven days. So they kept it for another seven days with gladness.
24For Hezekiah king of Judah g gave the assembly 1,000 bulls and 7,000
sheep for offerings, and the princes gave the assembly 1,000 bulls and
10,000 sheep. And the priests h consecrated themselves in great numbers.
25The whole assembly of Judah, and the priests and the Levites, i and the
whole assembly that came out of Israel, and the sojourners who came out of
the land of Israel, and the sojourners who lived in Judah, rejoiced. 26So
there was great joy in Jerusalem, for j since the time of Solomon the son of
David king of Israel there had been nothing like this in Jerusalem. 27Then
k the priests and the Levites arose and l blessed the people, and their voice
was heard, and their prayer came to m his holy habitation in heaven.
Hezekiah Organizes the Priests