2 CHRONICLES 31 [†]Now when all this was finished, all Israel who were
present went out to the cities of Judah and n broke in pieces the o pillars and
cut down p the Asherim and broke down the high places and the altars
throughout all Judah and Benjamin, and in Ephraim and Manasseh, until
they had destroyed them all. Then all the people of Israel returned to their
cities, every man to his possession.
2[†]And Hezekiah appointed q the divisions of the priests and of the
Levites, division by division, each according to his service, the priests and
the Levites, r for burnt offerings and peace offerings, to minister in the
gates of the camp of the LORD and to give thanks and praise. 3[†] s The
contribution of the king from his own possessions was for the burnt
offerings: the burnt offerings of morning and evening, and the burnt
offerings for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the appointed feasts, t as it
is written in the Law of the LORD.
4And he commanded the people who
lived in Jerusalem to give u the portion due to the priests and the Levites,
that they might give themselves to the Law of the LORD.
5[†]As soon as the
command was spread abroad, the people of Israel gave in abundance the
firstfruits of grain, wine, oil, honey, and of all the produce of the field. And
they brought in abundantly v the tithe of everything. 6And the people of
Israel and Judah who lived in the cities of Judah also brought in the tithe of
cattle and sheep, and w the tithe of the dedicated things that had been
dedicated to the LORD their God, and laid them in heaps. 7[†]In the third
month they began to pile up the heaps, and finished them in the seventh
month. 8When Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they
blessed the LORD and his people Israel. 9And Hezekiah questioned the
priests and the Levites about the heaps. 10Azariah the chief priest, who was
x of the house of Zadok, answered him, “Since they began to bring the
contributions into the house of the LORD, we have eaten and had enough
and have plenty left, y for the LORD has blessed his people, so that we have
this large amount left.”
11Then Hezekiah commanded them to prepare z chambers in the house of
the LORD, and they prepared them. 12And they faithfully brought in the
contributions, the tithes, and the dedicated things. The chief officer a in
charge of them was Conaniah the Levite, with b Shimei his brother as
second, 13 b while Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth, Jozabad, Eliel,
Ismachiah, b Mahath, and Benaiah were overseers assisting Conaniah and
Shimei his brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king and x Azariah
the chief officer of the house of God. 14And Kore the son of Imnah the
Levite, keeper of the east gate, was over the freewill offerings to God, to
apportion the contribution reserved for the LORD and the most holy
offerings. 15 b Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah
were faithfully assisting him in d the cities of the priests, to distribute the
portions to their brothers, old and young alike, by divisions, 16[†]except
those enrolled by genealogy, males from three years old and upward—all
who entered the house of the LORD e as the duty of each day required—for
their service according to their offices, by their divisions. 17The enrollment
of the priests was according to their fathers’ houses; that of the Levites
f from twenty years old and upward was according to their offices, by their
divisions. 18They were enrolled with all their little children, their wives,
their sons, and their daughters, the whole assembly, for they were faithful in
keeping themselves holy.
19And for the sons of Aaron, the priests, who were
in the fields of common land belonging to their cities, there were men in the
several cities who were g designated by name to distribute portions to every
male among the priests and to everyone among the Levites who was
enrolled.
20Thus Hezekiah did throughout all Judah, h and he did what was good
and right and faithful before the LORD his God. 21And every work that he
undertook in the service of the house of God and in accordance with the law
and the commandments, seeking his God, he did with all his heart, and
prospered.
Sennacherib Invades Judah