2 CHRONICLES 29 [†] j Hezekiah began to reign when he was twenty-five
years old, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s
name was Abijah [1] the daughter of k Zechariah. 2And he did what was
right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that David his father had
done.
Hezekiah Cleanses the Temple
3[†]In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he l opened the doors of
the house of the LORD and repaired them. 4[†]He brought in the priests and
the Levites and assembled them in the square on the east 5and said to them,
“Hear me, Levites! Now m consecrate yourselves, and consecrate the house
of the LORD, the God of your fathers, and carry out the filth from the Holy
Place. 6[†]For our fathers have been unfaithful and have done what was evil
in the sight of the LORD our God. They have forsaken him and n have turned
away their faces from the habitation of the LORD and turned their backs.
7They also o shut the doors of the vestibule and put out the lamps and have
not burned incense or offered burnt offerings in the Holy Place to the God
of Israel. 8[†]Therefore p the wrath of the LORD came on Judah and
Jerusalem, and he has made them q an object of horror, of astonishment,
r and of hissing, as you see with your own eyes. 9For behold, s our fathers
have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are
in captivity for this. 10Now t it is in my heart u to make a covenant with the
LORD, the God of Israel, in order that his fierce anger may turn away from
us. 11My sons, do not now be negligent, v for the LORD has chosen you to
stand in his presence, to minister to him and to be his ministers and make
offerings to him.”
12Then the Levites arose, w Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son
of Azariah, of the sons of x the Kohathites; and of the sons of x Merari, Kish
the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehallelel; and of the x Gershonites,
Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah; 13and of the sons of
y Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeuel; and of the sons of z Asaph, Zechariah and
Mattaniah; 14and of the sons of a Heman, Jehuel and Shimei; and of the
sons of b Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel. 15They gathered their brothers
and c consecrated themselves and went in as the king had commanded, d by
the words of the LORD, e to cleanse the house of the LORD.
16[†]The priests
went into the inner part of the house of the LORD to cleanse it, and they
brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the LORD
into the court of the house of the LORD. And the Levites took it and carried
it out to f the brook Kidron. 17They began to consecrate g on the first day of
the first month, and on the eighth day of the month they came to the
vestibule of the LORD. Then for eight days they consecrated the house of the
LORD, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they finished. 18[†]Then
they went in to Hezekiah the king and said, “We have cleansed all the house
of the LORD, the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the table for
the showbread and all its utensils. 19All the utensils h that King Ahaz
discarded in his reign when he was faithless, we have made ready and
consecrated, and behold, they are before the altar of the LORD.”
Hezekiah Restores Temple Worship
20[†]Then Hezekiah the king rose early and gathered the officials of the city
and went up to the house of the LORD.
21And they brought seven bulls,
seven rams, seven lambs, and seven male goats i for a sin offering for the
kingdom and for the sanctuary and for Judah. And he commanded the
priests, the sons of Aaron, to offer them on the altar of the LORD.
22So they
slaughtered the bulls, and the priests received the blood j and threw it
against the altar. And they slaughtered the rams, and their blood was thrown
against the altar. And they slaughtered the lambs, and their blood was
thrown against the altar.
23[†]Then the goats for the sin offering were
brought to the king and the assembly, k and they laid their hands on them,
24and the priests slaughtered them and made a sin offering with their blood
on the altar, l to make atonement for all Israel. For the king commanded that
the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.
25[†] m And he stationed the Levites in the house of the LORD with
cymbals, harps, and lyres, n according to the commandment of David and of
Gad o the king’s seer and of p Nathan the prophet, for the commandment
was from the LORD through his prophets. 26The Levites stood with q the
instruments of David, r and the priests with the trumpets. 27Then Hezekiah
commanded that the burnt offering be offered on the altar. And when the
burnt offering began, s the song to the LORD began also, and the trumpets,
accompanied by the instruments of David king of Israel. 28The whole
assembly worshiped, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded. All
this continued until the burnt offering was finished. 29When the offering
was finished, t the king and all who were present with him bowed
themselves and worshiped. 30And Hezekiah the king and the officials
commanded the Levites to sing praises to the LORD with the words of David
and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed
down and worshiped.
31[†]Then Hezekiah said, u “You have now consecrated yourselves to [2]
the LORD. Come near; bring sacrifices and thank offerings to the house of
the LORD.” And the assembly brought sacrifices and thank offerings, and all
who were v of a willing heart brought burnt offerings. 32The number of the
burnt offerings that the assembly brought was 70 bulls, 100 rams, and 200
lambs; all these were for a burnt offering to the LORD.
33And the
consecrated offerings were 600 bulls and 3,000 sheep. 34But the priests
were too few and could not flay all the burnt offerings, so until other priests
had consecrated themselves, w their brothers the Levites helped them, until
the work was finished— x for the Levites were more upright in heart than
the priests in consecrating themselves. 35Besides the great number of burnt
offerings, there was y the fat of the peace offerings, and there were z the
drink offerings for the burnt offerings. Thus the service of the house of the
LORD was restored. 36And Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because
God had provided for the people, for the thing came about suddenly.
Passover Celebrated