2 CHRONICLES 20 [†]After this i the Moabites and Ammonites, and with
them some of the Meunites, [1] came against Jehoshaphat for battle. 2Some
men came and told Jehoshaphat, “A great multitude is coming against you
from Edom, [2] from beyond the sea; and, behold, they are in j Hazazon-
tamar” (that is, k Engedi). 3[†]Then Jehoshaphat was afraid and set his face
l to seek the LORD, and m proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah. 4And
Judah assembled to seek help from the LORD; from all the cities of Judah
they came to seek the LORD.
5And Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem, in the
house of the LORD, before the new court, 6and said, “O LORD, God of our
fathers, are you not n God in heaven? You o rule over all the kingdoms of
the nations. p In your hand are power and might, so that none is able to
withstand you. 7Did you not, our God, q drive out the inhabitants of this
land before your people Israel, and give it forever to the descendants of
r Abraham your friend? 8And they have lived in it and have built for you in
it a sanctuary for your name, saying, 9
s ‘If disaster comes upon us, the
sword, judgment, [3] or pestilence, or famine, t we will stand before this
house and before you— u for your name is in this house—and cry out to you
in our affliction, and you will hear and save.’ 10And now behold, the men of
v Ammon and Moab and w Mount Seir, whom x you would not let Israel
invade when they came from the land of Egypt, y and whom they avoided
and did not destroy— 11behold, they reward us z by coming to drive us out
of your possession, which you have given us to inherit. 12O our God, will
you not a execute judgment on them? For we are powerless against this
great horde that is coming against us. We do not know what to do, but b our
eyes are on you.”
13Meanwhile all Judah stood before the LORD, with their little ones, their
wives, and their children. 14[†]And c the Spirit of the LORD came upon
Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, son of Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of
Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, in the midst of the assembly.
15And he said, “Listen, all Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem and King
Jehoshaphat: Thus says the LORD to you, d ‘Do not be afraid and do not be
dismayed at this great horde, e for the battle is not yours but God’s.
16Tomorrow go down against them. Behold, they will come up by the
ascent of Ziz. You will find them at the end of f the valley, east of the
wilderness of Jeruel. 17 g You will not need to fight in this battle. Stand firm,
hold your position, and see the salvation of the LORD on your behalf, O
Judah and Jerusalem.’ d Do not be afraid and do not be dismayed.
Tomorrow go out against them, h and the LORD will be with you.”
18Then Jehoshaphat i bowed his head with his face to the ground, and all
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before the LORD,
worshiping the LORD.
19And the Levites, of the j Kohathites and the
k Korahites, stood up to praise the LORD, the God of Israel, with a very loud
voice.
20[†]And they rose early in the morning and went out into l the
wilderness of Tekoa. And when they went out, Jehoshaphat stood and said,
“Hear me, Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem! m Believe in the LORD your
God, and you will be established; believe his prophets, and you will
succeed.” 21And when he had taken counsel with the people, he appointed
those who were to sing to the LORD and praise him n in holy attire, as they
went before the army, and say,
o “Give thanks to the LORD,
for his steadfast love endures forever.”
22And when they began to sing and praise, the LORD set p an ambush
against the men of q Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, who had come against
Judah, so that they were routed. 23For the men of Ammon and Moab rose
against the inhabitants of Mount Seir, devoting them to destruction, and
when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, r they all helped to
destroy one another.
The LORD Delivers Judah
24[†]When Judah came to the watchtower of the wilderness, they looked
toward the horde, and behold, there [4] were dead bodies lying on the
ground; none had escaped. 25When Jehoshaphat and his people came to take
their spoil, they found among them, in great numbers, goods, clothing, and
precious things, which they took for themselves until they could carry no
more. They were three days in taking the spoil, it was so much. 26On the
fourth day they assembled in the Valley of Beracah, [5] for there they
blessed the LORD. Therefore the name of that place has been called the
Valley of Beracah to this day.
27Then they returned, every man of Judah and
Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat at their head, returning to Jerusalem with joy,
s for the LORD had made them rejoice over their enemies. 28They came to
Jerusalem with harps and lyres and trumpets, to the house of the LORD.
29
t And the fear of God came on all the kingdoms of the countries when
they heard that the LORD had fought against the enemies of Israel. 30So the
realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet, u for his God gave him rest all around.
31[†] v Thus Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His
mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 32He walked in the way
of Asa his father and did not turn aside from it, doing what was right in the
sight of the LORD.
33 w The high places, however, were not taken away; x the
people had not yet set their hearts upon the God of their fathers.
34Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, from first to last, are written in
the chronicles of y Jehu the son of Hanani, z which are recorded in the Book
of the Kings of Israel.
The End of Jehoshaphat’s Reign
35[†] a After this Jehoshaphat king of Judah joined with Ahaziah king of
Israel, who acted wickedly.
36He joined him in building ships to go to
b Tarshish, and they built the ships in Ezion-geber.
37Then Eliezer the son of
Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, c “Because
you have joined with Ahaziah, the LORD will destroy what you have made.”
And the ships were wrecked and were not able to go to Tarshish.
Jehoram Reigns in Judah