2 KINGS 11 [†] u Now when v Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her
son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal family.
2But Jehosheba,
the daughter of King Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took w Joash the son of
Ahaziah and stole him away from among the king’s sons who were being
put to death, and she put [1] him and his nurse in a bedroom. Thus they [2]
hid him from Athaliah, so that he was not put to death. 3And he remained
with her six years, hidden in the house of the LORD, while Athaliah reigned
over the land.
Joash Anointed King in Judah
4
x But in the seventh year y Jehoiada sent and brought the captains of z the
Carites and of the guards, and had them come to him in the house of the
LORD. And he made a covenant with them and put them under oath in the
house of the LORD, and he showed them the king’s son. 5[†]And he
commanded them, “This is the thing that you shall do: one third of you,
a those who come off duty on the Sabbath and guard the king’s house
6( b another third being at the gate Sur and a third at the gate behind the
guards) shall guard the palace. [3] 7And the two divisions of you, which
come on duty in force on the Sabbath and guard the house of the LORD on
behalf of the king, 8shall surround the king, each with his weapons in his
hand. And whoever approaches the ranks is to be put to death. Be with the
king c when he goes out and when he comes in.”
9The captains did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded,
and they each brought his men who were to go off duty on the Sabbath,
with those who were to come on duty on the Sabbath, and came to Jehoiada
the priest. 10[†]And the priest gave to the captains the spears and d shields
that had been King David’s, which were in the house of the LORD.
11And
the guards stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, from the south
side of the house to the north side of the house, around the altar and the
house on behalf of the king. 12[†]Then he brought out the king’s son and put
e the crown on him and gave him f the testimony. And they proclaimed him
king and anointed him, and they clapped their hands and said, g “Long live
the king!”
13When Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she went
into the house of the LORD to the people. 14[†]And when she looked, there
was the king standing h by the pillar, according to the custom, and the
captains and the trumpeters beside the king, and all the people of the land
rejoicing and i blowing trumpets. And Athaliah j tore her clothes and cried,
“Treason! Treason!” 15Then Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains
who were set over the army, “Bring her out between the ranks, and put to
death with the sword anyone who follows her.” For the priest said, “Let her
not be put to death in the house of the LORD.” 16So they laid hands on her;
and she went through the horses’ entrance to the king’s house, and there she
was put to death.
17[†]And Jehoiada k made a covenant between the LORD and the king and
people, that they should be the LORD’s people, and also l between the king
and the people. 18Then all the people of the land went to m the house of
Baal and tore it down; n his altars and his images they broke in pieces, and
they killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And the priest posted
watchmen over the house of the LORD.
19And he took the captains, o the
Carites, the guards, and all the people of the land, and they brought the king
down from the house of the LORD, marching through p the gate of the
guards to the king’s house. And he took his seat on the throne of the kings.
20So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet after Athaliah
had been put to death with the sword at the king’s house.
Jehoash Reigns in Judah
21[†] [4] q Jehoash [5] was seven years old when he began to reign.
2 KINGS 12 In the seventh year of Jehu, Jehoash [1] began to reign, and he
reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah of
Beersheba. 2[†]And Jehoash did what was right in the eyes of the LORD all
his days, because Jehoiada the priest instructed him. 3Nevertheless, r the
high places were not taken away; the people continued to sacrifice and
make offerings on the high places.
Jehoash Repairs the Temple
4[†]Jehoash said to the priests, “All the money of the holy things s that is
brought into the house of the LORD, the money for which each man is
assessed—the money from the assessment of persons—and t the money that
a man’s heart prompts him to bring into the house of the LORD,
5let the
priests take, each from his donor, and let them repair the house wherever
any need of repairs is discovered.” 6But by the twenty-third year of King
Jehoash, the priests had made no repairs on the house. 7[†]Therefore King
Jehoash summoned Jehoiada the priest and the other priests and said to
them, “Why are you not repairing the house? Now therefore take no more
money from your donors, but hand it over for the repair of the house.” 8So
the priests agreed that they should take no more money from the people,
and that they should not repair the house.
9Then Jehoiada the priest took u a chest and bored a hole in the lid of it
and set it beside the altar on the right side as one entered the house of the
LORD. And the priests who guarded the threshold put in it all the money that
was brought into the house of the LORD.
10And whenever they saw that
there was much money in the chest, the king’s secretary and the high priest
came up and they bagged and counted v the money that was found in the
house of the LORD.
11Then they would give the money that was weighed out
into the hands of the workmen who had the oversight of the house of the
LORD. And they paid it out to the carpenters and the builders who worked
on the house of the LORD,
12and w to the masons and the stonecutters, as
well as to buy timber and quarried stone for making repairs on the house of
the LORD, and for any outlay for the repairs of the house. 13[†] x But there
were not made for the house of the LORD y basins of silver, snuffers, bowls,
trumpets, or any vessels of gold, or of silver, from the money that was
brought into the house of the LORD,
14for that was given to the workmen
who were repairing the house of the LORD with it. 15And z they did not ask
for an accounting from the men into whose hand they delivered the money
to pay out to the workmen, for they dealt honestly.
16The money from a the
guilt offerings and the money from the b sin offerings was not brought into
the house of the LORD; c it belonged to the priests.
17[†]At that time d Hazael king of Syria went up and fought against Gath
and took it. But when Hazael set his face e to go up against Jerusalem,
18Jehoash king of Judah f took all the sacred gifts that Jehoshaphat and
Jehoram and Ahaziah his fathers, the kings of Judah, had dedicated, g and
his own sacred gifts, and all the gold that was found in the treasuries of the
house of the LORD and of the king’s house, and sent these to Hazael king of
Syria. Then Hazael went away from Jerusalem.
The Death of Joash
19[†]Now the rest of the acts of Joash and all that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 20[†] h His
servants arose and made a conspiracy i and struck down Joash in the house
of j Millo, on the way that goes down to Silla. 21It was k Jozacar the son of
Shimeath and Jehozabad the son of k Shomer, his servants, who struck him
down, so that he died. And they buried him with his fathers in the city of
David, l and Amaziah his son reigned in his place.
Jehoahaz Reigns in Israel