2 KINGS 9 [†]Then Elisha the prophet called one of c the sons of the
prophets and said to him, d “Tie up your garments, and take this e flask of
oil in your hand, and go to f Ramoth-gilead. 2[†]And when you arrive, look
there for Jehu g the son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi. And go in and have
him rise from among h his fellows, and lead him to an inner chamber.
3[†]Then take the flask of oil and pour it on his head and say, ‘Thus says the
LORD, i I anoint you king over Israel.’ Then open the door and flee; do not
linger.”
4So the young man, the servant of the prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead.
5And when he came, behold, the commanders of the army were in council.
And he said, “I have a word for you, O commander.” And Jehu said, “To
which of us all?” And he said, “To you, O commander.” 6So he arose and
went into the house. And the young man poured the oil on his head, saying
to him, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, i I anoint you king over the
people of the LORD, over Israel. 7[†]And you shall strike down the house of
Ahab your master, so that I may avenge j on Jezebel the blood of my
servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the LORD.
8For the
whole house of Ahab shall perish, k and I will cut off from Ahab l every
male, m bond or free, in Israel. 9And I will make the house of Ahab like
n the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like o the house of Baasha
the son of Ahijah. 10[†] p And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the territory of
Jezreel, and none shall bury her.” Then he opened the door and fled.
11When Jehu came out to the servants of his master, they said to him,
q “Is all well? Why did r this mad fellow come to you?” And he said to
them, “You know the fellow and his talk.” 12And they said, “That is not
true; tell us now.” And he said, “Thus and so he spoke to me, saying, ‘Thus
says the LORD, I anoint you king over Israel.’” 13[†]Then in haste s every
man of them took his garment and put it under him on the bare [1] steps, and
they blew the trumpet and proclaimed, t “Jehu is king.”
Jehu Assassinates Joram and Ahaziah
14Thus Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against
Joram. ( u Now Joram with all Israel had been on guard at Ramoth-gilead
against v Hazael king of Syria, 15
w but King Joram had returned to be
healed in Jezreel of the wounds that the Syrians had given him, when he
fought with Hazael king of Syria.) So Jehu said, “If this is your decision,
then let no one slip out of the city to go and tell the news in Jezreel.” 16Then
Jehu mounted his chariot and went to Jezreel, for Joram lay there. And
Ahaziah king of Judah had come down to visit Joram.
17[†]Now the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezreel, and he saw
the company of Jehu as he came and said, “I see a company.” And Joram
said, “Take a horseman and send to meet them, and let him say, ‘Is it
peace?’” 18So a man on horseback went to meet him and said, “Thus says
the king, ‘Is it peace?’” And Jehu said, “What do you have to do with
peace? Turn around and ride behind me.” And the watchman reported,
saying, “The messenger reached them, but he is not coming back.” 19Then
he sent out a second horseman, who came to them and said, “Thus the king
has said, ‘Is it peace?’” And Jehu answered, “What do you have to do with
peace? Turn around and ride behind me.” 20Again the watchman reported,
“He reached them, but he is not coming back. And the driving x is like the
driving of Jehu y the son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously.”
21Joram said, z “Make ready.” And they made ready his chariot. a Then
Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah set out, each in his chariot,
and went to meet Jehu, and met him b at the property of Naboth the
Jezreelite. 22[†]And when Joram saw Jehu, he said, “Is it peace, Jehu?” He
answered, “What peace can there be, so long as c the whorings and the
sorceries of your mother Jezebel are so many?” 23Then Joram reined about
and fled, saying to Ahaziah, “Treachery, O Ahaziah!” 24And Jehu drew his
bow with his full strength, and shot Joram between the shoulders, so that
the arrow pierced his heart, and he sank in his chariot. 25[†]Jehu said to
Bidkar d his aide, “Take him up and throw him b on the plot of ground
belonging to Naboth the Jezreelite. For remember, when you and I rode side
by side behind Ahab his father, how e the LORD made this f pronouncement
against him: 26‘As surely as I saw yesterday the blood of Naboth and the
blood of his sons—declares the LORD—I will repay you on this plot of
ground.’ Now therefore take him up and throw him on the plot of ground, in
accordance with the word of the LORD.”
27[†] g When Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled in the direction
of Beth-haggan. And Jehu pursued him and said, “Shoot him also.” And
they shot him [2] in the chariot at the ascent of Gur, which is by h Ibleam.
And he fled to h Megiddo and died there. 28
i His servants carried him in a
chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in his tomb with his fathers in the city
of David.
29In the j eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab, Ahaziah began to reign
over Judah.
Jehu Executes Jezebel
30[†]When Jehu came to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it. And k she painted her
eyes and adorned her head and looked out of the window.
31[†]And as Jehu
entered the gate, she said, l “Is it peace, you Zimri, murderer of your
master?” 32[†]And he lifted up his face to the window and said, “Who is on
my side? Who?” Two or three eunuchs looked out at him. 33He said,
“Throw her down.” So they threw her down. And some of her blood
spattered on the wall and on the horses, and they trampled on her.
34Then he
went in and ate and drank. And he said, “See now to this cursed woman and
bury her, m for she is a king’s daughter.” 35But when they went to bury her,
they found no more of her than the skull and the feet and the palms of her
hands. 36[†]When they came back and told him, he said, “This is the word
of the LORD, which he spoke by his servant Elijah the Tishbite: n ‘In the
territory of Jezreel the dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezebel, 37and the corpse
of Jezebel shall be o as dung on the face of the field in the territory of
Jezreel, so that no one can say, This is Jezebel.’”
Jehu Slaughters Ahab’s Descendants