2 KINGS 19 [†] u As soon as King Hezekiah heard it, t he tore his clothes and
v covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of the LORD.
2And
he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the secretary, and
the senior priests, v covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah the son of
Amoz. 3[†]They said to him, “Thus says Hezekiah, This day is a day of
distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; children have come to the point of
birth, and there is no strength to bring them forth. 4 w It may be that the
LORD your God heard all the words of the Rabshakeh, whom his master the
king of Assyria has sent x to mock the living God, and will rebuke the
words that the LORD your God has heard; therefore lift up your prayer for
y the remnant that is left.” 5When the servants of King Hezekiah came to
Isaiah, 6Isaiah said to them, “Say to your master, ‘Thus says the LORD: Do
not be afraid because of the words that you have heard, with which z the
servants of the king of Assyria have a reviled me. 7[†]Behold, I will put a
spirit in him, so that b he shall hear a rumor and return to his own land, and
I will make him c fall by the sword in his own land.’”
Sennacherib Defies the LORD
8The Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria fighting against
d Libnah, for he heard that the king had left e Lachish. 9 f Now the king
heard concerning Tirhakah king of Cush, “Behold, he has set out to fight
against you.” So he sent messengers again to Hezekiah, saying, 10[†]“Thus
shall you speak to Hezekiah king of Judah: ‘Do not let your God g in whom
you trust deceive you by promising that h Jerusalem will not be given into
the hand of the king of Assyria. 11Behold, you have heard what the kings of
Assyria have done to all lands, devoting them to destruction. And shall you
be delivered? 12 i Have the gods of the nations delivered them, the nations
that my fathers destroyed, j Gozan, k Haran, Rezeph, and the people of
l Eden who were in Telassar? 13
m Where is the king of Hamath, the king of
Arpad, the king of the city of Sepharvaim, the king of Hena, or the king of
Ivvah?’”
Hezekiah’s Prayer
14Hezekiah received n the letter from the hand of the messengers and read
it; and Hezekiah went up to the house of the LORD and spread it before the
LORD.
15And Hezekiah prayed before the LORD and said: “O LORD, the God
of Israel, o enthroned above the cherubim, p you are the God, you alone, of
all the kingdoms of the earth; you have made heaven and earth. 16 q Incline
your ear, O LORD, and hear; r open your eyes, O LORD, and see; and hear
the words of Sennacherib, which he has sent s to mock the living God.
17Truly, O LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste the nations and their
lands 18and have cast their gods into the fire, for they were not gods, t but
the work of men’s hands, wood and stone. Therefore they were destroyed.
19So now, O LORD our God, save us, please, from his hand, u that all the
kingdoms of the earth may know that p you, O LORD, are God alone.”
Isaiah Prophesies Sennacherib’s Fall
20[†]Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, “Thus says the
LORD, the God of Israel: Your prayer to me about Sennacherib king of
Assyria v I have heard. 21[†]This is the word that the LORD has spoken
concerning him:
“She despises you, she scorns you—
w the virgin daughter of Zion;
she x wags her head behind you—
the daughter of Jerusalem.
22 “Whom have you y mocked and z reviled?
Against whom have you raised your voice
and lifted your eyes to the heights?
Against a the Holy One of Israel!
23
b By your messengers you have mocked the Lord,
and you have said, c ‘With my many chariots
I have gone up the heights of the mountains,
to the far recesses of d Lebanon;
I felled its tallest cedars,
its choicest cypresses;
I entered its farthest lodging place,
its most e fruitful forest.
24 I dug wells
and drank foreign waters,
and I dried up with the sole of my foot
all the streams f of Egypt.’
25 “Have you not heard
that g I determined it long ago?
I planned from days of old
what h now I bring to pass,
that you should turn fortified cities
into heaps of ruins,
26 while their inhabitants, shorn of strength,
are dismayed and confounded,
and have become i like plants of the field
and like tender grass,
like grass on the housetops,
blighted before it is grown.
27 “But I know your sitting down
j and your going out and coming in,
and your raging against me.
28 Because you have raged against me
and your complacency has come into my ears,
I will k put my hook in your nose
and my bit in your mouth,
and l I will turn you back on the way
by which you came.
29[†]“And this shall be m the sign for you: this year eat what grows of
itself, and in the second year what springs of the same. Then in the third
year sow and reap and plant vineyards, and eat their fruit. 30 n And the
surviving remnant of the house of Judah shall again take root downward
and bear fruit upward. 31For out of Jerusalem shall go a remnant, and out of
Mount Zion o a band of survivors. p The zeal of the LORD will do this.
32[†]“Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the king of Assyria: He
shall not come into this city or shoot an arrow there, or come before it with
a shield or q cast up a siege mound against it. 33
r By the way that he came,
by the same he shall return, and he shall not come into this city, declares the
LORD.
34 s For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake t and for the
sake of my servant David.”
35[†]And that night u the angel of the LORD went out and struck down
185,000 in the camp of the Assyrians. And when people arose early in the
morning, behold, these were all dead bodies. 36Then Sennacherib king of
Assyria departed and went home and lived at v Nineveh. 37[†]And as he was
worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, w Adrammelech and Sharezer,
his sons, struck him down with the sword and escaped into the land of
Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his place.
Hezekiah’s Illness and Recovery