2 KINGS 20 [†] x In those days y Hezekiah became sick and was at the point
of death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him and said to
him, “Thus says the LORD, z ‘Set your house in order, for you shall die; you
shall not recover.’” 2[†]Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and
prayed to the LORD, saying, 3[†]“Now, O LORD, a please remember how I
have walked before you in faithfulness and b with a whole heart, c and have
done what is good in your sight.” d And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
4[†]And
before Isaiah had gone out of the middle court, the word of the LORD came
to him: 5[†]“Turn back, and say to Hezekiah e the leader of my people, Thus
says the LORD, the God of David your father: f I have heard your prayer; g I
have seen your tears. Behold, I will heal you. On the third day you shall go
up to the house of the LORD,
6and I will add fifteen years to your life. I will
deliver you and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria, h and I will
defend this city for my own sake and for my servant David’s sake.” 7[†]And
Isaiah said, “Bring a cake of figs. And let them take and lay it on the boil,
that he may recover.”
8[†]And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “What shall be the sign that the LORD
will heal me, and that I shall go up to the house of the LORD on the third
day?” 9And Isaiah said, “This shall be i the sign to you from the LORD, that
the LORD will do the thing that he has promised: shall the shadow go
forward ten steps, or go back ten steps?” 10And Hezekiah answered, “It is
an easy thing for the shadow j to lengthen ten steps. Rather let the shadow
go back ten steps.” 11And Isaiah the prophet called to the LORD, k and he
brought the shadow back ten steps, by which it had gone down on the steps
of Ahaz.
Hezekiah and the Babylonian Envoys
12 l At that time m Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon,
n sent envoys with letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he heard that
Hezekiah had been sick. 13[†]And Hezekiah welcomed them, and he
showed them o all his treasure house, the silver, the gold, the spices, the
precious oil, his armory, all that was found in his storehouses. There was
nothing in his house or in all his realm that Hezekiah did not show them.
14Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah, and said to him, “What
did these men say? And from where did they come to you?” And Hezekiah
said, “They have come from a far country, from Babylon.” 15He said,
“What have they seen in your house?” And Hezekiah answered, “They have
seen all that is in my house; there is nothing in my storehouses that I did not
show them.”
16Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the LORD: 17Behold,
the days are coming, when p all that is in your house, and that which your
fathers have stored up till this day, shall be carried to Babylon. Nothing
shall be left, says the LORD.
18 q And some of your own sons, who shall be
born to you, shall be taken away, r and they shall be eunuchs in the palace
of the king of Babylon.” 19[†]Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, s “The word of
the LORD that you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “Why not, if there
will be peace and security in my days?”
20[†] t The rest of the deeds of Hezekiah and all his might and how he
made u the pool and the conduit v and brought water into the city, are they
not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 21
w And
Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and Manasseh his son reigned in his place.
Manasseh Reigns in Judah