2 KINGS 14 [†] k In the l second year of Joash the son of Joahaz, king of
Israel, m Amaziah the son of Joash, king of Judah, began to reign. 2He was
twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine
years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem. 3And
he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, yet not like David his father.
He did in all things as Joash his father had done. 4 n But the high places
were not removed; o the people still sacrificed and made offerings on the
high places. 5And as soon as the royal power was p firmly in his hand, he
struck down his servants q who had struck down the king his father.
6But he
did not put to death the children of the murderers, according to what is
written in the Book of the Law of Moses, where the LORD commanded,
r “Fathers shall not be put to death because of their children, nor shall
children be put to death because of their fathers. But each one shall die for
his own sin.”
7[†] s He struck down ten thousand Edomites in t the Valley of Salt and
took u Sela by storm, and called it v Joktheel, which is its name to this day.
8 w Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash [1] the son of Jehoahaz, son
of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come, x let us look one another in the face.”
9[†]And Jehoash king of Israel sent word to Amaziah king of Judah, y “A
thistle on Lebanon sent to a cedar on Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter
to my son for a wife,’ and a wild beast of Lebanon passed by and trampled
down the thistle. 10You have indeed z struck down Edom, a and your heart
has lifted you up. Be content with your glory, and stay at home, for why
should you provoke trouble so that you fall, you and Judah with you?”
11[†]But Amaziah would not listen. So Jehoash king of Israel went up,
and he and Amaziah king of Judah x faced one another in battle at b Beth-
shemesh, which belongs to Judah. 12And Judah was defeated by Israel,
c and every man fled to his home. 13And Jehoash king of Israel captured
Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Jehoash, son of Ahaziah, at Beth-
shemesh, and came to Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem for
four hundred cubits, [2] from d the Ephraim Gate to e the Corner Gate.
14And he seized f all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found
in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king’s house, also
hostages, and he returned to Samaria.
15[†] g Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash that he did, and his might, and
how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the Book
of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 16And Jehoash slept with his
fathers and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel, and Jeroboam
his son reigned in his place.
17 h Amaziah the son of Joash, king of Judah, lived fifteen years after the
death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel. 18Now the rest of the
deeds of Amaziah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the
Kings of Judah? 19[†]And they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem,
and he fled to i Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish and put him to
death there. 20And they brought him on horses; and he was buried in
Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David. 21And all the people of
Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king instead
of his father Amaziah. 22[†]He built j Elath and restored it to Judah, after
the king slept with his fathers.
Jeroboam II Reigns in Israel
23In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash, king of Judah,
Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel, began to reign in Samaria, and he
reigned forty-one years. 24And he did what was evil in the sight of the
LORD. He did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
k which he made Israel to sin. 25[†] l He restored the border of Israel m from
Lebo-hamath as far as the Sea of n the Arabah, according to the word of the
LORD, the God of Israel, which he spoke by his servant o Jonah the son of
Amittai, the prophet, who was from p Gath-hepher.
26For the LORD q saw
that the affliction of Israel was very bitter, r for there was none left, bond or
free, and there was none to help Israel. 27[†] s But the LORD had not said that
he would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven, so he saved them
by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.
28[†]Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam and all that he did, and his
might, how he fought, and how he restored t Damascus and u Hamath to
Judah in Israel, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the
Kings of Israel? 29And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, the kings of Israel,
and Zechariah his son reigned in his place.
Azariah Reigns in Judah
2 KINGS 15 v In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel,
w Azariah the son of Amaziah, king of Judah, began to reign. 2He was
x sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-two years in
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 3[†]And he did
what was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his father
Amaziah had done. 4
y Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away.
The people still sacrificed and made offerings on the high places. 5[†] z And
the LORD touched the king, so that he was a leper [1] to the day of his death,
a and he lived in a separate house. [2] And Jotham the king’s son was over
the household, governing the people of the land. 6[†]Now the rest of the
acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 7And Azariah slept with his fathers, and
they buried him with his fathers b in the city of David, and Jotham his son
reigned in his place.
Zechariah Reigns in Israel
8[†]In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah king of Judah, Zechariah the son of
Jeroboam reigned over Israel in Samaria six months. 9And he did what was
evil in the sight of the LORD, as his fathers had done. He did not depart from
the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, c which he made Israel to sin.
10Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him and d struck him down at
Ibleam and put him to death and reigned in his place. 11Now the rest of the
deeds of Zechariah, behold, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles
of the Kings of Israel. 12(This was e the promise of the LORD that he gave to
Jehu, “Your sons shall sit on the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.”
And so it came to pass.)
Shallum Reigns in Israel
13Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the thirty-ninth year of
f Uzziah [3] king of Judah, and he reigned one month in g Samaria. 14Then
Menahem the son of Gadi came up from h Tirzah and came to Samaria, and
he struck down Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria and put him to death
and reigned in his place. 15Now the rest of the deeds of Shallum, and the
conspiracy that he made, behold, they are written in the Book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Israel. 16[†]At that time Menahem sacked
Tiphsah and all who were in it and its territory from Tirzah on, because they
did not open it to him. Therefore he sacked it, i and he ripped open all the
women in it who were pregnant.
Menahem Reigns in Israel
17In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah king of Judah, Menahem the son of
Gadi began to reign over Israel, and he reigned ten years in Samaria. 18And
he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD. He did not depart all his days
from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin.
19 j Pul [4] the king of Assyria came against the land, and Menahem gave
j Pul a thousand talents [5] of silver, that he might help him k to confirm his
hold on the royal power.
20Menahem exacted the money from Israel, that is,
from all the wealthy men, fifty shekels [6] of silver from every man, to give
to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back and did not stay
there in the land. 21Now the rest of the deeds of Menahem and all that he
did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of
Israel? 22And Menahem slept with his fathers, and Pekahiah his son reigned
in his place.
Pekahiah Reigns in Israel
23In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah the son of
Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned two years.
24And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD. He did not turn away
from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, c which he made Israel to sin.
25And Pekah the son of Remaliah, his captain, conspired against him with
fifty men of the people of Gilead, and struck him down in Samaria, in the
citadel of the king’s house with Argob and Arieh; he put him to death and
reigned in his place. 26Now the rest of the deeds of Pekahiah and all that he
did, behold, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of
Israel.
Pekah Reigns in Israel
27[†]In the fifty-second year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah the son of
Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned twenty
years. 28And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD. He did not
depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, l which he made Israel
to sin.
29In the days of Pekah king of Israel, m Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria
came and captured n Ijon, o Abel-beth-maacah, Janoah, p Kedesh, q Hazor,
Gilead, and r Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and he carried the people
captive to Assyria. 30Then Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy
against Pekah the son of Remaliah and struck him down and put him to
death and reigned in his place, s in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of
Uzziah. 31Now the rest of the acts of Pekah and all that he did, behold, they
are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
Jotham Reigns in Judah
32[†]In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, Jotham
the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, began to reign. 33He was t twenty-five
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok. 34[†]And
he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, u according to all that his
father Uzziah had done. 35 v Nevertheless, the high places were not
removed. The people still sacrificed and made offerings on the high places.
He built w the upper gate of the house of the LORD.
36Now the rest of the
acts of Jotham and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 37[†]In those days the LORD began to
send x Rezin the king of Syria and x Pekah the son of Remaliah against
Judah. 38Jotham slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the
city of David his father, and Ahaz his son reigned in his place.
Ahaz Reigns in Judah