2 SAMUEL 23 [†]Now these are the last words of David:
The oracle of David, the son of Jesse,
the oracle of l the man who was raised on high,
j the anointed of the God of Jacob,
the sweet psalmist of Israel: [1]
2[†] m “The Spirit of the LORD speaks by me;
his word is on my tongue.
3 The God of Israel has spoken;
n the Rock of Israel has said to me:
When one rules justly over men,
ruling o in the fear of God,
4[†] he p dawns on them like the morning light,
like the sun shining forth on a cloudless morning,
like rain [2] that makes grass to sprout from the earth.
5[†] “For does not my house stand so with God?
q For he has made with me an everlasting covenant,
ordered in all things and secure.
For will he not cause to prosper
all my help and my desire?
6 But worthless men [3] are all like thorns that are thrown away,
for they cannot be taken with the hand;
7 but the man who touches them
arms himself with iron and the shaft of a spear,
and they are utterly consumed with fire.” [4]
David’s Mighty Men
8[†] r These are the names of the mighty men whom David had: s Josheb-
basshebeth a Tahchemonite; he was chief of the three. [5] He wielded his
spear [6] against eight hundred whom he killed at one time.
9And next to him among the three mighty men was Eleazar the son of
t Dodo, son of u Ahohi. He was with David when they defied the Philistines
who were gathered there for battle, and the men of Israel withdrew.
10He
rose and struck down the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand
clung to the sword. And the LORD brought about a great victory that day,
and the men returned after him only to strip the slain.
11[†]And next to him was Shammah, the son of Agee the v Hararite. The
Philistines gathered together at Lehi, where there was a plot of ground full
of lentils, and the men fled from the Philistines. 12But he took his stand in
the midst of the plot and defended it and struck down the Philistines, and
the LORD worked a great victory.
13[†]And three of the thirty chief men went down and came about harvest
time to David at the w cave of Adullam, when a band of Philistines was
encamped x in the Valley of Rephaim. 14David was then y in the stronghold,
and z the garrison of the Philistines was then at Bethlehem. 15And David
said longingly, “Oh, that someone would give me water to drink from the
well of Bethlehem that is by the gate!” 16[†]Then the three mighty men
broke through the camp of the Philistines and drew water out of the well of
Bethlehem that was by the gate and carried and brought it to David. But he
would not drink of it. He poured it out to the LORD 17and said, “Far be it
from me, O LORD, that I should do this. Shall I drink a the blood of the men
who went at the risk of their lives?” Therefore he would not drink it. These
things the three mighty men did.
18[†]Now Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of
the thirty. [7] And he wielded his spear against three hundred men [8] and
killed them and won a name beside the three. 19He was the most renowned
of the thirty [9] and became their commander, but he did not attain to b the
three.
20And c Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was a valiant man [10] of d Kabzeel,
a doer of great deeds. He struck down two ariels [11] of Moab. He also went
down and struck down a lion in a pit on a day when snow had fallen. 21And
he struck down an Egyptian, a handsome man. The Egyptian had a spear in
his hand, but Benaiah went down to him with a staff and snatched the spear
out of the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear.
22These
things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and won a name beside the three
mighty men. 23He was renowned among the thirty, but he did not attain to
the three. And David set him over his bodyguard.
24
e Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of
Dodo of Bethlehem, 25 f Shammah of Harod, Elika of Harod, 26Helez the
Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh g of Tekoa, 27Abiezer h of Anathoth, Mebunnai
i the Hushathite, 28Zalmon j the Ahohite, Maharai k of Netophah, 29Heleb
the son of Baanah k of Netophah, Ittai the son of Ribai of l Gibeah of the
people of Benjamin, 30Benaiah m of Pirathon, Hiddai of the brooks of
n Gaash, 31Abi-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth of o Bahurim, 32[†]Eliahba
the Shaalbonite, the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, 33 p Shammah the Hararite,
Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite, 34Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai q of
Maacah, r Eliam the son of s Ahithophel of Gilo, 35Hezro [12] t of Carmel,
Paarai the Arbite, 36Igal the son of Nathan u of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
37Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai v of Beeroth, the armor-bearer of Joab the
son of Zeruiah, 38
w Ira the x Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, 39
y Uriah the Hittite:
thirty-seven in all.
David’s Census