2 SAMUEL 21 [†]Now there was a famine in the days of David for three
years, year after year. And David z sought the face of the LORD. And the
LORD said, “There is bloodguilt on Saul and on his house, because he put
the Gibeonites to death.” 2So the king called the Gibeonites and spoke to
them. Now the Gibeonites were not of the people of Israel but a of the
remnant of the Amorites. Although the people of Israel had sworn to spare
them, Saul had sought to strike them down in his zeal for the people of
Israel and Judah. 3[†]And David said to the Gibeonites, “What shall I do for
you? And how shall I make atonement, that you may bless b the heritage of
the LORD?” 4The Gibeonites said to him, “It is not a matter of silver or gold
between us and Saul or his house; neither is it for us to put any man to death
in Israel.” And he said, “What do you say that I shall do for you?” 5They
said to the king, “The man who consumed us and planned to destroy us, so
that we should have no place in all the territory of Israel, 6let seven of his
sons be given to us, so that we may hang them before the LORD at c Gibeah
of Saul, d the chosen of the LORD.” And the king said, “I will give them.”
7[†]But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Saul’s son Jonathan,
because of e the oath of the LORD that was between them, between David
and Jonathan the son of Saul. 8The king took the two sons of f Rizpah the
daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and
the five sons of Merab [1] the daughter of Saul, whom g she bore to h Adriel
the son of Barzillai the Meholathite; 9[†]and he gave them into the hands of
the Gibeonites, and they hanged them on the mountain before the LORD, and
the seven of them perished together. They were put to death in the first days
of harvest, i at the beginning of barley harvest.
10[†] j Then Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth and spread it for
herself on the rock, from the beginning of harvest until rain fell upon them
from the heavens. And she did not allow the birds of the air to come upon
them by day, or the beasts of the field by night. 11When David was told
what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done, 12David
went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of his son Jonathan from the
men of Jabesh-gilead, k who had stolen them from the public square of
l Beth-shan, where the Philistines had hanged them, on the day the
Philistines killed Saul on Gilboa. 13And he brought up from there the bones
of Saul and the bones of his son Jonathan; and they gathered the bones of
those who were hanged. 14And they buried the bones of Saul and his son
Jonathan in the land of Benjamin in m Zela, in the tomb of Kish his father.
And they did all that the king commanded. And after that n God responded
to the plea for the land.
War with the Philistines
15[†]There was war again between the Philistines and Israel, and David
went down together with his servants, and they fought against the
Philistines. And David grew weary.
16[†]And Ishbi-benob, one of the
descendants o of the giants, whose spear weighed three hundred shekels [2]
of bronze, and who was armed with a new sword, thought to kill David.
17But Abishai the son of Zeruiah came to his aid and attacked the Philistine
and killed him. Then David’s men swore to him, p “You shall no longer go
out with us to battle, lest you quench q the lamp of Israel.”
18 r After this there was again war with the Philistines at Gob. Then
s Sibbecai t the Hushathite struck down Saph, who was one of the
descendants u of the giants. 19[†]And there was again war with the
Philistines at Gob, and v Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim, the Bethlehemite,
struck down Goliath the Gittite, w the shaft of whose spear was like a
weaver’s beam. [3] 20And there was again war at Gath, where there was a
man of great stature, who had six fingers on each hand, and six toes on each
foot, twenty-four in number, and he also was descended x from the giants.
21[†]And when y he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimei, David’s
brother, struck him down. 22These four were descended x from the giants in
Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
David’s Song of Deliverance