2 SAMUEL 5 [†]Then all the tribes of Israel u came to David at Hebron and
said, “Behold, v we are your bone and flesh. 2In times past, when Saul was
king over us, w it was you who led out and brought in Israel. And the LORD
said to you, x ‘You shall be shepherd of my people Israel, and you shall be
prince [1] over Israel.’” 3So all the elders of Israel came to the king at
Hebron, y and King David made a covenant with them at Hebron z before
the LORD, and they anointed David king over Israel. 4David was thirty years
old when he began to reign, and a he reigned forty years. 5 a At Hebron he
reigned over Judah b seven years and six months, and at Jerusalem he
reigned over all Israel and Judah thirty-three years. [2]
6[†] c And the king and his men went to Jerusalem d against the Jebusites,
the inhabitants of the land, who said to David, “You will not come in here,
but the blind and the lame will ward you off”—thinking, “David cannot
come in here.” 7Nevertheless, David took the stronghold of Zion, e that is,
the city of David. 8[†]And David said on that day, “Whoever would strike
the Jebusites, let him get up the water shaft to attack ‘the lame and the
blind,’ who are hated by David’s soul.” Therefore it is said, “The blind and
the lame shall not come into the house.” 9[†]And David lived in the
stronghold and called it e the city of David. And David built the city all
around from the f Millo inward. 10And David became greater and greater,
for the LORD, the God of hosts, was with him.
11[†] g And h Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar
trees, also carpenters and masons who built David a house. 12And David
knew that the LORD had established him king over Israel, and that he had
exalted his kingdom for the sake of his people Israel.
13[†]And David took more i concubines and wives from Jerusalem, after
he came from Hebron, and more sons and daughters were born to David.
14
j And these are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem:
Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 15Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia,
16Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.
David Defeats the Philistines
17[†]When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over
Israel, all the Philistines went up to search for David. But David heard of it
and went down k to the stronghold. 18Now the Philistines had come and
spread out in l the Valley of Rephaim. 19And David m inquired of the LORD,
“Shall I go up against the Philistines? Will you give them into my hand?”
And the LORD said to David, “Go up, for I will certainly give the Philistines
into your hand.” 20And David came to Baal-perazim, and David defeated
them there. And he said, “The LORD has broken through my enemies before
me like a breaking flood.” n Therefore the name of that place is called Baal-
perazim. [3] 21And the Philistines left their idols there, and David and his
men carried them away.
22[†]And the Philistines came up yet again o and spread out in the Valley
of Rephaim. 23 p And when David inquired of the LORD, he said, “You shall
not go up; go around to their rear, and come against them opposite the
balsam trees. 24And q when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of
the balsam trees, then rouse yourself, r for then the LORD has gone out
before you to strike down the army of the Philistines.” 25And David did as
the LORD commanded him, and struck down the Philistines from Geba s to
Gezer.
The Ark Brought to Jerusalem