2 SAMUEL 6 [†] t David again gathered all the chosen men of Israel, thirty
thousand. 2And David arose and went with all the people who were with
him from u Baale-judah v to bring up from there the ark of God, which is
called by the name of the LORD of hosts w who sits enthroned on the
cherubim. 3[†]And they carried the ark of God x on a new cart and brought
it y out of the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill. And Uzzah and
Ahio, [1] the sons of Abinadab, were driving the new cart, [2] 4with the ark of
God, and Ahio went before the ark.
Uzzah and the Ark
5[†]And David and all the house of Israel were celebrating before the LORD,
with z songs [3] and lyres and harps and tambourines and castanets and
cymbals. 6[†]And when they came to the threshing floor of a Nacon, Uzzah
b put out his hand to the ark of God and took hold of it, for the oxen
stumbled. 7And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah, and
c God struck him down there because of his error, and he died there beside
the ark of God. 8And David was angry because the LORD had broken out
against Uzzah. And that place is called Perez-uzzah [4] to this day.
9And
David was afraid of the LORD that day, and he said, “How can the ark of the
LORD come to me?” 10So David was not willing to take the ark of the LORD
into the city of David. But David took it aside d to the house of Obed-edom
the Gittite. 11And the ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom
the Gittite three months, e and the LORD blessed Obed-edom and all his
household.
12[†]And it was told King David, “The LORD has blessed the household
of Obed-edom and all that belongs to him, because of the ark of God.” f So
David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom
g to the city of David with rejoicing. 13And when h those who bore the ark
of the LORD had gone six steps, i he sacrificed an ox and a fattened animal.
14[†]And David j danced before the LORD with all his might. And David
was k wearing a linen ephod. 15So David and all the house of Israel brought
up the ark of the LORD with shouting and with the sound of the horn.
David and Michal
16[†]As the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal the
daughter of Saul looked out of the window and saw King David leaping and
dancing before the LORD, and she despised him in her heart. 17And they
brought in the ark of the LORD and set it l in its place, inside the tent that
David had pitched for it. m And David offered burnt offerings and peace
offerings before the LORD.
18And when David had finished offering the
burnt offerings and the peace offerings, n he blessed the people in the name
of the LORD of hosts 19and distributed among all the people, the whole
multitude of Israel, both men and women, a cake of bread, a portion of
meat, [5] and a cake of raisins to each one. o Then all the people departed,
each to his house.
20[†]And David returned to bless his household. But Michal the daughter
of Saul came out to meet David and said, “How the king of Israel honored
himself today, p uncovering himself today before the eyes of his servants’
female servants, as one of the q vulgar fellows shamelessly uncovers
himself!” 21And David said to Michal, “It was before the LORD, r who
chose me above your father and above all his house, to appoint me as
prince [6] over Israel, the people of the LORD—and I will celebrate before
the LORD.
22I will make myself yet more contemptible than this, and I will
be abased in your [7] eyes. But by the female servants of whom you have
spoken, by them I shall be held in honor.” 23And Michal the daughter of
Saul had no child to the day of her death.
The Lord’s Covenant with David