2 SAMUEL 11 [†] h i In the spring of the year, the time when kings go out to
battle, David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel. And they
ravaged the Ammonites and besieged j Rabbah. But David remained at
Jerusalem.
2[†]It happened, late one afternoon, when David arose from his couch
and was walking on k the roof of the king’s house, that he saw from the roof
a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful. 3[†]And David sent
and inquired about the woman. And one said, “Is not this l Bathsheba, the
daughter of Eliam, the wife of m Uriah the Hittite?” 4[†]So David sent
messengers and took her, and she came to him, and he lay with her. ( n Now
she had been purifying herself from her uncleanness.) Then she returned to
her house. 5And the woman conceived, and she sent and told David, “I am
pregnant.”
6[†]So David sent word to Joab, “Send me Uriah the Hittite.” And Joab
sent Uriah to David. 7When Uriah came to him, David asked how Joab was
doing and how the people were doing and how the war was going. 8Then
David said to Uriah, “Go down to your house and o wash your feet.” And
Uriah went out of the king’s house, and there followed him a present from
the king. 9[†]But Uriah slept at the door of the king’s house with all the
servants of his lord, and did not go down to his house. 10When they told
David, “Uriah did not go down to his house,” David said to Uriah, “Have
you not come from a journey? Why did you not go down to your house?”
11Uriah said to David, p “The ark and Israel and Judah dwell in booths, and
my lord Joab and q the servants of my lord are camping in the open field.
Shall I then go to my house, to eat and to drink and to lie with my wife? As
you live, and r as your soul lives, I will not do this thing.” 12Then David
said to Uriah, “Remain here today also, and tomorrow I will send you
back.” So Uriah remained in Jerusalem that day and the next. 13And David
invited him, and he ate in his presence and drank, s so that he made him
drunk. And in the evening he went out to lie on his couch with q the
servants of his lord, but he did not go down to his house.
14[†]In the morning David t wrote a letter to Joab and sent it by the hand
of Uriah. 15In the letter he wrote, “Set Uriah in the forefront of the hardest
fighting, and then draw back from him, u that he may be struck down, and
die.” 16And as Joab was besieging the city, he assigned Uriah to the place
where he knew there were valiant men. 17And the men of the city came out
and fought with Joab, and some of the servants of David among the people
fell. Uriah the Hittite also died. 18Then Joab sent and told David all the
news about the fighting. 19And he instructed the messenger, “When you
have finished telling all the news about the fighting to the king, 20then, if
the king’s anger rises, and if he says to you, ‘Why did you go so near the
city to fight? Did you not know that they would shoot from the wall?
21[†] v Who killed Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? Did not a woman
cast an upper millstone on him from the wall, so that he died at Thebez?
Why did you go so near the wall?’ then you shall say, ‘Your servant Uriah
the Hittite is dead also.’”
22So the messenger went and came and told David all that Joab had sent
him to tell. 23The messenger said to David, “The men gained an advantage
over us and came out against us in the field, but we drove them back to the
entrance of the gate. 24Then the archers shot at your servants from the wall.
Some of the king’s servants are dead, and your servant Uriah the Hittite is
dead also.” 25David said to the messenger, “Thus shall you say to Joab, ‘Do
not let this matter displease you, for the sword devours now one and now
another. Strengthen your attack against the city and overthrow it.’ And
encourage him.”
26[†]When the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she
lamented over her husband. 27And when the mourning was over, David sent
and brought her to his house, and w she became his wife and bore him a
son. But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD.
Nathan Rebukes David