2 SAMUEL 18 [†]Then David mustered the men who were with him and set
over them commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds. 2[†]And
David sent out the army, one third under the command of Joab, one third
under the command of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab’s brother, and one
third under the command of s Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the men,
“I myself will also go out with you.” 3
t But the men said, “You shall not go
out. For if we flee, they will not care about us. If half of us die, they will not
care about us. But you are worth ten thousand of us. Therefore it is better
that you send us help from the city.” 4The king said to them, “Whatever
seems best to you I will do.” So the king stood at the side of the gate, while
all the army marched out by hundreds and by thousands. 5[†]And the king
ordered Joab and Abishai and Ittai, “Deal gently for my sake with the young
man Absalom.” u And all the people heard when the king gave orders to all
the commanders about Absalom.
6[†]So the army went out into the field against Israel, and the battle was
fought in the v forest of Ephraim. 7And the men of Israel were defeated
there by the servants of David, and the loss there was great on that day,
twenty thousand men. 8The battle spread over the face of all the country,
and the forest devoured more people that day than the sword.
9[†]And Absalom happened to meet the servants of David. Absalom was
riding on his mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a great
oak, [1] w and his head caught fast in the oak, and he was suspended
between heaven and earth, while the mule that was under him went on.
10And a certain man saw it and told Joab, “Behold, I saw Absalom hanging
in an oak.” 11Joab said to the man who told him, “What, you saw him! Why
then did you not strike him there to the ground? I would have been glad to
give you ten pieces of silver and a belt.” 12But the man said to Joab, “Even
if I felt in my hand the weight of a thousand pieces of silver, I would not
reach out my hand against the king’s son, for x in our hearing the king
commanded you and Abishai and Ittai, ‘For my sake protect the young man
Absalom.’ 13On the other hand, if I had dealt treacherously against his
life [2] (and there is nothing hidden from the king), then you yourself would
have stood aloof.” 14Joab said, “I will not waste time like this with you.”
And he took three javelins in his hand and thrust them into the heart of
Absalom while he was still alive in the oak. 15And ten young men, Joab’s
armor-bearers, surrounded Absalom and struck him and killed him.
16Then Joab blew the trumpet, and the troops came back from pursuing
Israel, for Joab restrained them. 17[†]And they took Absalom and threw him
into a great pit in the forest and raised over him y a very great heap of
stones. And all Israel z fled every one to his own home. 18[†]Now Absalom
in his lifetime had taken and set up for himself a the pillar that is in b the
King’s Valley, for he said, c “I have no son to keep my name in
remembrance.” He called the pillar after his own name, and it is called
Absalom’s monument [3] to this day.
David Hears of Absalom’s Death
19[†]Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said, d “Let me run and carry news to
the king that e the LORD has delivered him from the hand of his enemies.”
20And Joab said to him, “You are not to carry news today. You may carry
news another day, but today you shall carry no news, because the king’s son
is dead.” 21Then Joab said to the Cushite, “Go, tell the king what you have
seen.” The Cushite bowed before Joab, and ran. 22Then Ahimaaz the son of
Zadok said again to Joab, “Come what may, let me also run after the
Cushite.” And Joab said, “Why will you run, my son, seeing that you will
have no reward for the news?” 23“Come what may,” he said, “I will run.”
So he said to him, “Run.” Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of f the plain, and
outran the Cushite.
24[†]Now David g was sitting between the two gates, and h the watchman
went up to the roof of the gate by the wall, and when he lifted up his eyes
and looked, he saw a man running alone. 25The watchman called out and
told the king. And the king said, “If he is alone, there is news in his mouth.”
And he drew nearer and nearer.
26The watchman saw another man running.
And the watchman called to the gate and said, “See, another man running
alone!” The king said, “He also brings news.” 27The watchman said, “I
think the running of the first is i like the running of Ahimaaz the son of
Zadok.” And the king said, j “He is a good man and comes with good
news.”
28Then Ahimaaz cried out to the king, “All is well.” And he bowed
before the king with his face to the earth and said, k “Blessed be the LORD
your God, who has delivered up the men who raised their hand against my
lord the king.” 29[†]And the king said, l “Is it well with the young man
Absalom?” Ahimaaz answered, “When Joab sent the king’s servant, your
servant, I saw a great commotion, but I do not know what it was.” 30And
the king said, “Turn aside and stand here.” So he turned aside and stood
still.
David’s Grief
31And behold, the Cushite came, and the Cushite said, “Good news for my
lord the king! For m the LORD has delivered you this day from the hand of
all who rose up against you.” 32The king said to the Cushite, l “Is it well
with the young man Absalom?” And the Cushite answered, n “May the
enemies of my lord the king and all who rise up against you for evil be like
that young man.” 33 [4] And the king was deeply moved and went up g to the
chamber over the gate and wept. And as he went, he said, o “O my son
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Would I had died instead of you, O
Absalom, my son, my son!”
Joab Rebukes David
2 SAMUEL 19 It was told Joab, “Behold, the king is weeping and mourning
for Absalom.” 2[†]So the victory that day was turned into mourning for all
the people, for the people heard that day, “The king is grieving for his son.”
3And the people stole into the city that day as people steal in who are
ashamed when they flee in battle. 4[†]The king p covered his face, and the
king cried with a loud voice, q “O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son,
my son!” 5Then Joab came into the house to the king and said, “You have
today covered with shame the faces of all your servants, who have this day
saved your life and the lives of your sons and your daughters and the lives
of your wives and your concubines, 6because you love those who hate you
and hate those who love you. For you have made it clear today that
commanders and servants are nothing to you, for today I know that if
Absalom were alive and all of us were dead today, then you would be
pleased. 7Now therefore arise, go out and speak r kindly to your servants,
for I swear by the LORD, if you do not go, not a man will stay with you this
night, and this will be worse for you than all the evil that has come upon
you from your youth until now.” 8[†]Then the king arose and took his s seat
in the gate. And the people were all told, “Behold, the king is sitting in the
gate.” And all the people came before the king.
David Returns to Jerusalem
Now Israel had t fled every man to his own home. 9And all the people were
arguing throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, u “The king delivered us
from the hand of our enemies and v saved us from the hand of the
Philistines, and now w he has fled out of the land from Absalom. 10[†]But
Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore why
do you say nothing about bringing the king back?”
11And King David sent this message to x Zadok and Abiathar the priests:
“Say to the elders of Judah, ‘Why should you be the last to bring the king
back to his house, when the word of all Israel has come to the king? [1]
12You are my brothers; y you are my bone and my flesh. Why then should
you be the last to bring back the king?’ 13[†]And say to Amasa, z ‘Are you
not my bone and my flesh? a God do so to me and more also, if you are not
b commander of my army from now on in place of Joab.’” 14And he swayed
the heart of all the men of Judah c as one man, so that they sent word to the
king, “Return, both you and all your servants.” 15[†]So the king came back
to the Jordan, and Judah came to Gilgal to meet the king and to bring the
king over the Jordan.
David Pardons His Enemies
16[†]And d Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjaminite, from Bahurim, hurried
to come down with the men of Judah to meet King David. 17And with him
were a thousand men from Benjamin. And e Ziba the servant of the house of
Saul, with his fifteen sons and his twenty servants, rushed down to the
Jordan before the king, 18and they crossed the ford to bring over the king’s
household and to do his pleasure. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down
before the king, as he was about to cross the Jordan, 19and said to the king,
f “Let not my lord hold me guilty or remember how your servant g did
wrong on the day my lord the king left Jerusalem. Do not let the king take it
to heart. 20For your servant knows that I have sinned. Therefore, behold, I
have come this day, the first h of all the house of Joseph to come down to
meet my lord the king.” 21Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered, “Shall not
Shimei be put to death for this, because i he cursed the LORD’s anointed?”
22But David said, j “What have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah, that
you should this day be as an adversary to me? k Shall anyone be put to
death in Israel this day? For do I not know that I am this day king over
Israel?” 23 l And the king said to Shimei, “You shall not die.” And the king
gave him his oath.
24[†]And m Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king.
He had neither taken care of his feet nor trimmed his beard nor washed his
clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came back in safety.
25And when he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to him,
n “Why did you not go with me, Mephibosheth?” 26He answered, “My lord,
O king, my servant deceived me, for your servant said to him, ‘I will saddle
a donkey for myself, [2] that I may ride on it and go with the king.’ For
o your servant is lame. 27
p He has slandered your servant to my lord the
king. But my lord the king is q like the angel of God; do therefore what
seems good to you. 28For all my father’s house were but men doomed to
death before my lord the king, but r you set your servant among those who
eat at your table. What further right have I, then, to cry to the king?” 29And
the king said to him, “Why speak any more of your affairs? I have decided:
you and Ziba shall divide the land.” 30And Mephibosheth said to the king,
“Oh, let him take it all, since my lord the king has come safely home.”
31[†]Now s Barzillai the Gileadite had come down from Rogelim, and he
went on with the king to the Jordan, to escort him over the Jordan.
32Barzillai was a very aged man, eighty years old. t He had provided the
king with food while he stayed at Mahanaim, for he was a very wealthy
man. 33And the king said to Barzillai, “Come over with me, and I will
provide for you with me in Jerusalem.” 34But Barzillai said to the king,
u “How many years have I still to live, that I should go up with the king to
Jerusalem? 35I am this day v eighty years old. Can I discern what is pleasant
and what is not? Can your servant taste what he eats or what he drinks? Can
I still listen to the voice of singing men and singing women? Why then
should your servant be w an added burden to my lord the king? 36Your
servant will go a little way over the Jordan with the king. Why should the
king repay me with such a reward? 37Please let your servant return, that I
may die in my own city near the grave of my father and my mother. But
here is your servant x Chimham. Let him go over with my lord the king, and
do for him whatever seems good to you.” 38And the king answered,
“Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do for him whatever seems
good to you, and all that you desire of me I will do for you.” 39Then all the
people went over the Jordan, and the king went over. And y the king kissed
Barzillai and blessed him, and he returned to his own home. 40The king
went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him. All the people of Judah,
and also half the people of Israel, brought the king on his way.
41[†]Then all the men of Israel came to the king and said to the king,
“Why have our brothers the men of Judah stolen you away and z brought
the king and his household over the Jordan, and all David’s men with him?”
42All the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, “Because the king is
a our close relative. Why then are you angry over this matter? Have we
eaten at all at the king’s expense? Or has he given us any gift?” 43And the
men of Israel answered the men of Judah, “We have b ten shares in the king,
and in David also we have more than you. Why then did you despise us?
Were we not the first to speak of bringing back our king?” c But the words
of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.
The Rebellion of Sheba