2 SAMUEL 8 [†] g After this David defeated the Philistines and subdued them,
and David took h Metheg-ammah out of the hand of the Philistines.
2 i And he defeated Moab and he measured them with a line, making them
lie down on the ground. Two lines he measured to be put to death, and one
full line to be spared. And the Moabites j became servants to David and
k brought tribute.
3[†]David also defeated l Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king of m Zobah,
as he went to restore his power at the river Euphrates. 4 n And David took
from him 1,700 horsemen, and 20,000 foot soldiers. And David
o hamstrung all the chariot horses but left enough for 100 chariots. 5
p And
when the q Syrians of Damascus came to help l Hadadezer king of m Zobah,
David struck down 22,000 men of the Syrians. 6[†]Then David put
garrisons in Aram of Damascus, and the Syrians r became servants to David
and brought tribute. s And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he
went. 7And David took t the shields of gold that were carried by the
servants of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem. 8And from Betah and
from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, King David took very much bronze.
9When Toi king of u Hamath heard that David had defeated the whole
army of Hadadezer,
10Toi sent his son Joram to King David, to ask about his
health and to bless him because he had fought against Hadadezer and
defeated him, for Hadadezer had often been at war with Toi. And Joram
brought with him articles of silver, of gold, and of bronze. 11 v These also
King David dedicated to the LORD, together with the silver and gold that he
dedicated from all the nations he subdued, 12from Edom, w Moab, x the
Ammonites, y the Philistines, z Amalek, and from the spoil of Hadadezer
the son of Rehob, king of m Zobah.
13[†]And David made a name for himself when he returned from striking
down 18,000 Edomites in a the Valley of Salt. 14Then he put garrisons in
Edom; throughout all Edom he put garrisons, b and all the Edomites became
David’s servants. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he went.
David’s Officials
15[†]So David reigned over all Israel. And David administered justice and
equity to all his people. 16 c Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the army, and
d Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder,
17[†]and e Zadok the son of
Ahitub and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar were priests, and f Seraiah was
secretary,
18[†]and g Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over [1] the
h Cherethites and the Pelethites, and David’s sons were priests.
David’s Kindness to Mephibosheth