2 TIMOTHY 4 [†] h I charge you in the presence of God and of Christ Jesus,
i who is to judge the living and the dead, and by j his appearing and his
kingdom: 2[†]preach the word; be ready in season and out of season;
k reprove, rebuke, and l exhort, with complete patience and teaching.
3[†] m For the time is coming when people will not endure n sound [1]
teaching, but having itching ears they will accumulate for themselves
teachers to suit their own passions, 4[†]and o will turn away from listening
to the truth and p wander off into myths. 5[†]As for you, q always be sober-
minded, r endure suffering, do the work of s an evangelist, t fulfill your
ministry.
6[†]For u I am already being poured out as a drink offering, and the time
of my v departure has come. 7[†] w I have fought the good fight, x I have
finished the race, I have kept the faith. 8[†]Henceforth there is y laid up for
me z the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, a the righteous judge, will
award to me on b that Day, and not only to me but also to all c who have
loved his appearing.
Personal Instructions
9[†] d Do your best to come to me soon. 10[†]For e Demas, f in love with
g this present world, h has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica. Crescens
has gone to Galatia, [2] i Titus to Dalmatia. 11[†] h Luke alone is with me.
Get j Mark and bring him with you, for he is very useful to me for ministry.
12
k Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus. 13[†]When you come, bring the cloak
that I left with Carpus at Troas, also the books, and above all the
parchments. 14[†] l Alexander the coppersmith did me great harm; m the
Lord will repay him according to his deeds. 15Beware of him yourself, for
he strongly opposed our message. 16[†]At my first defense no one came to
stand by me, but all deserted me. n May it not be charged against them!
17[†]But o the Lord stood by me and p strengthened me, so that through me
the message might be fully proclaimed and q all the Gentiles might hear it.
So r I was rescued s from the lion’s mouth. 18[†]The Lord will rescue me
from every evil deed and bring me safely into his heavenly kingdom. t To
him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Final Greetings
19[†]Greet u Prisca and Aquila, and v the household of Onesiphorus.
20Erastus remained at Corinth, and I left w Trophimus, who was ill, at
Miletus. 21[†] x Do your best to come before winter. Eubulus sends greetings
to you, as do Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers. [3]
22[†]The Lord be y with your spirit. z Grace be with you. [4]
Study Notes for 2 Timothy
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:1–2 Opening. Paul begins this letter in his
standard way. As he awaits death, he reminds Timothy that the purpose of
his work as an apostle has been to proclaim the gospel, the promise of
the life that is in Christ Jesus.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:3–2:13 Enduring for the Gospel. Paul’s
thanksgiving (1:3–5) leads to encouraging Timothy (1:6–14; 2:1–13). In
between, he provides positive and negative examples of faithfulness in
gospel service (1:15–18). Facing his own death, Paul urges Timothy to
continue in faithfulness in spite of hardship.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:3–5 Paul thanks God for Timothy. Paul notes that
both he (my ancestors) and Timothy (your grandmother . . . your
mother) have a heritage of faith.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:6–14 Paul challenges Timothy to continue following
in his footsteps (compare 3:10–11).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:6 fan into flame the gift of God. Paul does not
explain what this gift is (see note on 1 Tim. 4:14), but Timothy is to grow
and strengthen it. The laying on of my hands may refer to Timothy’s
ordination. Paul was probably part of “the council of elders” mentioned in 1
Tim. 4:14.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:7 spirit. Probably the Holy Spirit.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:8–10 These verses summarize the gospel for which
God’s servants suffer. Paul clearly believes that such a glorious message is
worthy of their suffering. God, who saved us . . . our Savior Christ Jesus.
Paul often describes both God the Father and God the Son as Saviors of
their people (compare 1 Tim. 1:1; Titus 1:3–4; 2:13 [and note]).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:12 Paul suffers because of his current imprisonment
and approaching death. what has been entrusted to me. Either the gospel,
which God entrusted to Paul, or Paul’s life (“what I have entrusted to him,”
see esv footnote). Either way, this confidence in God prevents Paul from
being ashamed. See note on v. 14. until that Day. See v. 18; 4:8; Heb.
10:25; and notes on Amos 5:18–20; 1 Thess. 5:2–3.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:13 sound words. Jesus’ teaching and work direct
Paul’s understanding and application of the gospel.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:14 the good deposit entrusted to you. The gospel
in the fullest sense, that is, the entire content of the Christian faith.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:15 Asia was the Roman province in which Ephesus,
Timothy’s current place of service, was located. all . . . turned away from
me. Key people who could have supported Paul failed to do so. It seemed
as if “all” had deserted him (compare 4:16). There is no further information
about Phygelus and Hermogenes. These details of Paul’s situation help
explain why Timothy, the faithful one, was such a source of joy for Paul
(see 1:3–5).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 1:18 that Day. See note on v. 12.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:2 what you have heard from me. Throughout this
letter, Paul emphasizes the message Timothy received from him (see 1:13;
2:8).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:4 This verse has at times been misinterpreted as a
call away from “secular,” civilian pursuits. The Bible, however, does not
separate life into “spiritual” and “secular” areas. All of life is to be lived in
obedience to the Spirit according to the Word of God. Paul is warning
Timothy not to allow anything to distract him from his task.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:7 Think . . . for the Lord will give you
understanding. The believer’s efforts and God’s empowering work
together.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:8 Remember Jesus Christ. Paul certainly doesn’t
think that Timothy is in danger of forgetting Jesus! Rather, this is a call to
remain mindful of the gospel message.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:10 endure everything. Paul suffered persecution,
hunger, and prison to preach the gospel. for the sake of the elect. For those
God saves. See notes on Rom. 8:29; 8:30; Eph. 1:11.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:11–13 In this context, to deny Christ means a final
rejection of him. This is not merely a temporary lapse in one’s faith (if we
are faithless).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:14–3:9 Dealing with False Teachers. These verses
divide into two sections. In 2:14–26 Paul introduces the false teaching
(2:16) and explains how Timothy should respond to it. In 3:1–9 he describes
the false teachers in more detail. Having called Timothy to continued
endurance (1:3–2:13), Paul addresses the problem of false teaching directly.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:14 Remind them. To this point Timothy has been
the one who must “remember” (v. 8). Now Paul shifts to Timothy’s role in
reminding the people under his care. not to quarrel about words. Paul is
clearly willing to argue when the gospel is at stake (e.g., Gal. 2:11). What
he prohibits here is pointless argument that has no positive, practical impact
on people (see 2 Tim. 2:16–17).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:15 Do your best. Timothy must consistently and
happily carry out the work God has given him to do. One way to do this is
to make sure he is rightly handling Scripture. This contrasts with the
meaningless disputes the false teachers engage in.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:17 spread like gangrene. This phrase pictures the
false teaching killing as it spreads. This is in contrast to the “healthy” or
“sound” teaching of Paul (see note on 1 Tim. 1:10; also 2 Tim. 4:3; Titus
1:9). Hymenaeus was mentioned as a false teacher in 1 Tim. 1:20. Philetus
is not mentioned elsewhere.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:18 The idea that the resurrection has already
happened seems similar to some errors Paul addresses in 1 Corinthians 15
(see especially 1 Cor. 15:12–20). Apparently some were teaching that
believers had already entered the glorified post-resurrection state.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:19 God’s firm foundation. Probably the elect
members of the church; see v. 10. bearing this seal. See note on John 6:27.
The twofold inscription that follows emphasizes (1) divine sovereignty
(preserving) and (2) human responsibility (persevering).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:20–21 Paul illustrates his call to “depart from
iniquity” (v. 19). What is dishonorable includes both doctrinal and moral
error, since Paul discusses both in this letter.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:22 youthful passions. Not only sinful sexual desire
but sinful desires in general, especially those characteristic of youth. One of
these might be the tendency to quarrel or be hotheaded (vv. 23–25).
Christians need not fight such battles alone, but along with other believers.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:24–26 This is a key passage on how pastors should
handle people who make trouble in the church.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:24 Servant is the common word for “slave” or
“bondservant.” Paul also uses it to refer to those who, like himself, preach
the gospel (Rom. 1:1).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:25 Most interpreters see these opponents as
unbelievers who do not have a knowledge of the truth (that is, salvation;
see note on 1 Tim. 2:4). Paul advises correcting the opponents in a spirit of
gentleness (Gal. 6:1; Eph. 4:2; 1 Pet. 3:15). This verse further emphasizes
the sovereignty of God in granting repentance.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 2:26 come to their senses. Sin has a destructive effect
on human reason. Salvation restores the ability to see reality. the snare of
the devil. Paul often describes humanity as enslaved by the devil and in
need of rescue (see 2 Cor. 4:4).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:1 last days. As Acts 2:17 indicates, “the last days”
began with the coming of the Spirit at Pentecost (see note on 1 Tim. 4:1).
Thus Paul’s prediction of times of difficulty that will occur in “the last
days” is already beginning to be fulfilled.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:2–5 This list of vices vividly describes the negative
impact of those who were opposing Paul and Timothy. The list begins and
ends with references to misplaced love.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:5 Avoid such people. Do not allow them to be part
of the church or support their ministries. Unlike those discussed in 2:25–26,
the people described here (3:2–5) remain stubborn in their sin.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:6 women, burdened with sins. These women carry
guilt from their past. Some seek self-cleansing. They are vulnerable to false
teaching about self-denial (see 1 Tim. 4:3). Others seek to justify their
behavior. They are vulnerable to false teaching that says that sin is
acceptable (see 2 Tim. 3:2–4).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:8 Jannes and Jambres are the names given in early
extrabiblical Jewish writings to the Egyptian magicians who opposed
Moses in Ex. 7:8–13. In these writings, these men symbolize opposition to
God’s truth. corrupted in mind. Again false teaching is considered bad
thinking (see note on 2 Tim. 2:26). disqualified regarding the faith. In
spite of their claims, these people do not have saving faith. They oppose the
gospel in their teaching and in their living (see Titus 1:16).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:10–4:8 Contrasting Timothy with False
Teachers. Paul tells Timothy how to resist the false teachers and remain
faithful to the gospel.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:10–17 This paragraph opens with a clear, strong
contrast: “You, however.” The false teachers live and teach one way (vv. 1–
9). Paul gives Timothy a totally different pattern to follow. See note on Phil.
3:17.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:11 Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra are cities Paul
visited on his first missionary journey (Acts 13–14). Timothy joined him
during his second journey (Acts 16:1). Lystra was Timothy’s hometown
(Acts 16:1–2), so he probably knew of the sufferings that Paul had
experienced there on this first journey. From them all the Lord rescued
me does not mean that God kept Paul from experiencing any harm. In
Lystra he was stoned and left for dead (Acts 14:19–20). Paul probably
means that the Lord preserved him from death and kept him faithful even in
suffering. See 2 Tim. 4:18.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:14 from whom you learned. This could refer to
Paul. It may also refer back to Timothy’s mother and grandmother (1:5; see
esv footnote on 3:14).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:15 to make you wise for salvation. Scripture can
lead to the “knowledge of the truth” (2:25; 1 Tim. 2:4). It has the power to
bring its readers to faith (see James 1:18; 1 Pet. 1:23). False teaching leads
only to useless arguments and ungodliness.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 3:16 All Scripture, as Paul uses the term here, would
include all of the OT and at least some NT writings, which by this time
were already considered Scripture (see 1 Tim. 5:18 and note; 2 Pet. 3:15–16
and note). Breathed out by God translates a Greek word that does not
occur in any known Greek text (biblical or otherwise) prior to this letter.
Some suggest that Paul invented this term from words meaning “God” and
“breathed.” This is certainly possible. The term stresses the divine origin
and thus the authority of Scripture. Paul says that the writings themselves
are the words spoken (“breathed out”) by God. The opponents of Paul and
Timothy stressed certain aspects or portions of Scripture (such as
genealogies, 1 Tim. 1:4; see Titus 3:9). Paul stresses the authority of all
Scripture. The divine origin of Scripture is the reason for its power to
convert (2 Tim. 3:15) and its usefulness in training (v. 17).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:1 Paul reminds Timothy that Christ is the one who
will judge him, and that Christ will certainly return (his appearing).
Christ’s kingdom is the ultimate reality with which Timothy should be
concerned.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:2 Preach the word refers back to “Scripture”
(3:16). The gospel is proclaimed by explaining the Scriptures. in season
and out of season. When it is convenient and when it is inconvenient.
Reprove, rebuke, and exhort means communicating all that Scripture
includes—doctrine, instruction, correction, and encouragement.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:3 the time is coming. Paul is not referring to some
time in the distant future. He means a situation he expects Timothy to face
or to be already facing (see 3:1; 1 Tim. 4:1–3). Itching ears indicates a
desire for unusual teaching. People with “itching ears” seek teachers who
will tell them what they want to hear (to suit their own passions).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:4 myths. See note on 1 Tim. 1:4.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:5 The role of evangelist is not clearly explained in
Scripture. Paul instructs Timothy in terms of the “gospel” (see 1:8, 10; 2:8).
This certainly includes preaching to the unconverted. However, Paul does
not typically distinguish between evangelism and discipling.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:6 a drink offering. Paul describes his death in OT
sacrificial language (compare Gen. 35:14; Ex. 29:40–41). This suggests he
sees himself as laying down his life for the sake of the gospel. However, the
use of the passive voice (I am . . . being poured out) stresses that it is God
who is acting here.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:7 I have fought the good fight. Using athletic
imagery (as is typical of Paul; see 1 Cor. 9:24–27; Phil. 3:14), he states that
he has dedicated himself to the one thing worth dying for, the gospel
mission. There is no claim of personal glory here. Paul is grateful that he
has finally completed the course God set for him (see Acts 20:24). By
God’s grace, he has done what he encourages Timothy to do (2 Tim. 4:5).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:8 crown of righteousness. One interpretation is that
this means “the crown that consists of righteousness,” referring to the final
righteous state of believers. Another interpretation is “the crown that is the
reward for righteousness,” that is, a victory crown. This agrees with Matt.
5:12; 10:41–42; 1 Cor. 3:14; Heb. 11:26; 2 John 8. all who have loved his
appearing. All true believers, who eagerly await Christ’s return (see Titus
2:13; contrast Demas, 2 Tim. 4:10).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:9–22 Conclusion. Paul closes with some final
comments concerning travel, and greetings. The key themes of the letter
continue even here.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:10 Paul is persevering despite suffering (1:11–12;
2:8–13) because he has an eternal perspective (4:6–8). Demas (see Col.
4:14; Philem. 24) abandoned Paul because he loved this present world.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:11 Despite his earlier problem with Mark (Acts
15:36–40), Paul now desires Mark’s presence and considers him useful . . .
for ministry. Clearly, Mark has become a faithful and effective pioneer
missionary.
JOHN MARK
John Mark was probably Barnabas’s cousin (Col. 4:10). The early church
at Jerusalem met at the home of his mother, Mary (Acts 12:12). He
accompanied Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey, but
then chose to leave them. As a result, Paul refused to take him along on
his second expedition. However, it seems that Mark eventually regained
Paul’s favor (2 Tim. 4:11). He ultimately demonstrated his effectiveness
and commitment as a missionary pioneer and as the author of the Gospel
of Mark. He was closely associated with the apostle Peter, who refers to
Mark as his “son” (1 Pet. 5:13). (2 Timothy 4:11)
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:13 cloak. A heavy coat that would be especially
important in the winter (see v. 21). books. Scrolls made of papyrus. The
papyrus scrolls may have included writing materials, official documents, or
Paul’s personal correspondence. parchments. Vellum sheets made of
animal skins. The parchments probably would have been books of some
kind.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:14 Alexander. It is unclear whether this is the same
Alexander mentioned in 1 Tim. 1:20. If he is the same person, he may still
have been in Ephesus causing trouble. However, Alexander is identified as a
coppersmith. There is evidence of coppersmiths in Troas, so this may be a
different man living in Troas. This would explain his mention here after
Paul has asked Timothy to collect his cloak in Troas (2 Tim. 4:13).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:16 first defense. Paul’s preliminary hearing before
Caesar during his second imprisonment. May it not be charged against
them! Paul forgives those who abandoned him.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:17 Deliverance from the lion’s mouth was a
common biblical metaphor for rescue from great danger (see Ps. 22:21;
Dan. 6:22; Heb. 11:33). For Paul it means that he was not put to death at
that time (2 Tim. 4:16).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:18 will rescue me. An assurance of ultimate well-
being, not an assurance of release from his present danger (compare Luke
21:16–19). Paul expects execution, but even through death God will bring
him safely into his heavenly kingdom.
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:19 Prisca (a variant of Priscilla) and Aquila are
often mentioned in connection with Paul (Acts 18:2, 18, 26).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:21 Travel in the Mediterranean basically stopped
during winter due to dangerous conditions by land and sea. If his trip to
Rome was not completed before then, Timothy would not be able to come
“soon” (v. 9).
2 TIMOTHY—NOTE ON 4:22 be with your spirit. Paul uses this language also
in Gal. 6:18; Phil. 4:23; and Philem. 25. He uses “be with you” in Rom.
16:20; 1 Cor. 16:23; 2 Cor. 13:14; 1 Thess. 5:28. The meaning is the same.
Ti t u s
(return to table of contents)
Titus 1 • Titus 2 • Titus 3
Introduction to Titus
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipient
Theme
Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Titus
Global Message of Titus
Titus and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Titus
The Global Message of Titus for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Titus
Introduction to Titus
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipient
The apostle Paul wrote this letter to his coworker Titus. The letter was probably
written in the mid-60s A.D. between Paul’s first imprisonment (Acts 28) and his
second imprisonment, which is not mentioned in Acts.
Theme
The letter’s theme is the unbreakable link between faith and practice, belief and
behavior. This truth is the basis for Paul’s criticism of false teaching, his
instruction in Christian living, and standards he sets for church leaders.
Purpose
Paul had recently completed a journey to Crete. He had left Titus there to teach
the new church (see Acts 14:21–23).
False teachers were already a problem in the church (Titus 1:10–16), and the
letter focuses primarily on that issue. The description of elders (1:5–9) and of
proper Christian living (2:1–10; 3:1–3) appear to be worded for intentional
contrast with these false teachers. The content of the false teaching is not fully
explained (as in 1 Timothy). There appears to be a significant Jewish element
to the teaching. The opponents come from “the circumcision party” (Titus
1:10). They are interested in “Jewish myths” (1:14) and perhaps ritual purity
(1:15). Paul’s primary concern, however, is with the practical effect of the false
teaching. They taught ritual purity, but they lived in a way that proved they did
not know God (1:16).
This false teaching would have been welcome in Crete, which was known in
the ancient world for immorality. But Paul expected the gospel to produce real
godliness in everyday life, even in Crete.
In dealing with the false teaching, Paul also provides Titus with a portrait of
a healthy church. He describes proper leadership (1:5–9), proper handling of
error (1:10–16; 3:9–11), proper Christian living (especially important for new
believers in an immoral setting; 2:1–10; 3:1–2), and the gospel as the source of
godliness (2:11–14; 3:3–7).
Key Themes
1. The gospel produces godliness in the lives of believers. There is no
legitimate separation between belief and behavior (1:1; 2:1, 11–14; 3:4–
7).
2. One’s deeds will either prove or disprove one’s claim to know God (1:16).
3. It is vitally important to have godly men serving as elders/pastors (1:5–9).
4. True Christian living will draw others to the gospel (2:5, 8, 10).
5. Good works have an important place in the lives of believers (2:1–10, 14;
3:1–2, 8, 14).
6. It is important to deal clearly and firmly with doctrinal and moral error in
the church (1:10–16; 3:9–11).
7. The gospel is the basis for Christian ethics (2:11–14; 3:3–7).
Outline
I. Opening (1:1–4)
II. The Occasion: The Need for Proper Leadership (1:5–9)
III. The Problem: False Teachers (1:10–16)
IV . Christian Living in Contrast to the False Teachers (2:1–3:8)
V . The Problem Restated: False Teachers (3:9–11)
VI. Closing Encouragement (3:12–15)
The Setting of Titus
c. A.D. 62–64
Paul likely wrote Titus during a fourth missionary journey not recorded in
the book of Acts. Writing from an unknown location, he instructed Titus in how
to lead the churches on the island of Crete. The churches there had apparently
been founded by Paul.
The Global Message of Titus
The message of Titus is that sound teaching leads to godliness. As authentic
apostolic doctrine is received and loved, all kinds of people will learn to
live in ways that are pleasing to God—from those currently enmeshed in
false teaching to those who are elders and overseers of the church.
Titus and Redemptive History
In Titus as in 1 and 2 Timothy, Paul speaks of Christian salvation as
“appearing” (Titus 2:11, 13; 3:4; 1 Tim. 6:14; 2 Tim. 1:10; 4:1, 8). This is
one way Paul speaks of the coming of Jesus into this world as the Savior of
God’s people.
Yet Paul speaks of Christ’s coming not as some kind of isolated event but
as the climactic moment of all of human history. In the opening verses of
Titus, Paul says that God promised eternal life “before the ages began”
(Titus 1:2; literally, “before times eternal”). Then he speaks of the grace of
God appearing and “bringing salvation for all people” (2:11). Here we see a
reference to Christ’s first coming. We also see once more that the gospel is a
message “for all people.”
Paul then goes on to say that, while Christ’s first coming trains us to live
in godliness in the present, we are “waiting for our blessed hope, the
appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ” (Titus
2:13). Here Paul speaks of Christ’s “appearing” as still being in one sense a
future event, that is, a second coming.
In Titus, then, Paul addresses a specific historical context against the
broad background of a history of redemption that stretches from eternity
past all the way forward to Christ’s second coming. Of particular
importance to the apostle is that the salvation that has appeared in Christ is
for all people.
Universal Themes in Titus
Doctrine fuels godliness. Right at the start of his letter, in the greeting, Paul
underscores that doctrinal truth leads to godly living. He says he is an
apostle for the sake of believers’ “knowledge of the truth, which accords
with godliness” (Titus 1:1). Throughout the letter Paul comes back to this
theme. It is especially striking when Paul exhorts Titus to “teach what
accords with sound doctrine” (2:1), for Paul does not then launch into a
series of teachings about theology; rather, he speaks of godly behavior:
“Older men are to be sober-minded, dignified, self-controlled, sound in
faith, in love . . .” (2:2). The church today is reminded that orthodox
doctrine is crucial, yet orthodoxy is not an end in itself but is for the sake of
making us more godly.
Qualifications for church leadership. In the first chapter of his letter to
Titus, Paul carefully lays out the qualifications for church leadership. He
lists the virtues that must be present in those who are elders (or overseers)
of the church. As Christians from all around the world hear these
instructions today, we should note that none of the virtues Paul lists are
culturally conditioned and none relate only to specific ethnic groups: these
character traits are marks of godliness to be cultivated in the lives of all
God’s people. And, says Paul, they should be most clearly on display
among church leaders.
Grace and obedience. The letter to Titus contains two of the Bible’s most
magnificent statements concerning the salvation God has accomplished
through Jesus Christ (Titus 2:11–14; 3:4–7). Indeed, Titus 3:4–7 may be the
most effective summary of salvation in the entire New Testament. At the
same time, while affirming that believers are saved “not because of works
done by us” (3:5), few New Testament letters contain such frequent
exhortations to good works (2:7, 14; 3:8, 14; see also 1:16). The fact that
we have been saved by grace alone through faith alone does not cancel out
the need to work hard at showing God’s love in our lives. Rather, it is the
grace of the gospel that makes possible, and motivates, such lives of sincere
love.
The Global Message of Titus for Today
The letter to Titus gives the church a rich theology of the gospel of grace for
all people, connecting this gospel with the good works that must shine forth
in the lives of Christians.
While it is utterly apart from moral goodness that we are saved—we are
sinful, and Jesus Christ alone has fully redeemed us from the curse of sin
and death—this salvation is not meant to be a blessing that terminates with
us. Salvation is meant to result in beautiful, sacrificial living. Paul closes his
letter by remarking, “And let our people learn to devote themselves to good
works, so as to help cases of urgent need” (Titus 3:14).
As the church seeks to be true disciples of Christ in the various corners of
the world in which God has placed us, we will find many opportunities to
help those in “urgent need.” The unborn and others not able to defend
themselves must be defended by Christians, who understand that all humans
are made in God’s image and that human life therefore has intrinsic worth
and dignity. The scarcity in some parts of the world of such basic needs as
clean water prompts those who have been saved by God’s matchless
compassion to extend compassion to others, by laboring to supply these
needs. As Christians come into contact with others who are mired in sin, our
response cannot be one of judgment and condemnation, for we too are
sinners who have been saved by grace rather than being judged and
condemned.
In these ways and a thousand more, we are freed to serve those around us
with the mercy we ourselves have been shown. Paul’s letter to Titus
summons us to a life of self-giving love as we walk with Jesus, “who gave
himself for us to redeem us from all lawlessness and to purify for himself a
people for his own possession who are zealous for good works” (Titus
2:14).
Greeting