3 JOHN 1 [†] a The elder to the beloved Gaius, b whom I love in truth.
2[†]Beloved, I pray that all may go well with you and that you may be in
good health, as it goes well with your soul. 3[†]For c I rejoiced greatly when
the brothers [1] came and testified to your truth, as indeed you are walking
in the truth. 4[†]I have no greater joy than to hear that d my children are
walking in the truth.
Support and Opposition
5[†]Beloved, it is a faithful thing you do in all your efforts for e these
brothers, f strangers as they are, 6[†]who testified to your love before the
church. You will do well to send them on their journey in a manner
g worthy of God. 7[†]For they have gone out for the sake of h the name,
i accepting nothing from the Gentiles. 8[†]Therefore we ought to support
people like these, that we may be fellow workers for the truth.
9[†]I have written something to the church, but Diotrephes, who likes to
put himself first, does not acknowledge our authority.
10[†]So if I come, I
will bring up what he is doing, talking wicked nonsense against us. And not
content with that, he refuses to welcome the brothers, and also stops those
who want to and puts them out of the church.
11[†]Beloved, j do not imitate evil but imitate good. k Whoever does good
is from God; l whoever does evil has not seen God. 12[†]Demetrius m has
received a good testimony from everyone, and from the truth itself. We also
add our testimony, and n you know that our testimony is true.
Final Greetings
13[†] o I had much to write to you, but I would rather not write with pen and
ink. 14I hope to see you soon, and we will talk face to face.
15[†]Peace be to you. The friends greet you. Greet the friends, p each by
name.
Study Notes for 3 John
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 1–4 Greeting: The Elder’ s Joy at Gaius’ s Faithfulness.
John’s opening tone is affectionate and positive.
FACT
A personal letter. John’s letter to Gaius follows the pattern of personal
letters of his day: greetings (v. 1), a prayer for Gaius’s health (v. 2a), the
main message (vv. 5–12), and a brief farewell (vv. 13–15). John departs
from the standard form only in his expression of concern for his friend’s
spiritual well-being (vv. 2b–4).
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 1 Beloved (compare vv. 5, 11) conveys the truth that
Christians are linked by the love God has shown them in Christ (compare 1
John 4:9–10). Love in truth could mean simply “truly love” as a Christian
brother, or it could refer to the “truth” of the gospel, in the service of which
the lives of John and Gaius are intertwined.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 2 Wishes for good health were standard in the openings
of ancient Greek letters, but John also expresses care for Gaius’s soul.
Though spiritual growth can come through sickness and affliction (see Ps.
119:67, 71), it is right to pray for good health, as Jesus’ earthly healing
ministry also demonstrated.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 3 the brothers came. Apparently Christians from Gaius’s
church had visited John. They told John of Gaius’s faithful Christian life.
truth. Faithfulness to Christ and his commands. (See also note on John
14:6.)
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 4 joy. See 1 John 1:4 and note. my children. His readers
are first of all “children of God” (compare John 1:12; 11:52; 1 John 3:1, 2,
10; 5:2). But John as their spiritual overseer could view them as his own
children too (see note on 1 John 2:1). Compare Paul’s use of this familial
language (1 Tim. 1:2, 18; Titus 1:4; Philem. 10).
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 5–8 Praise for Gaius’ s Support for Traveling
Christian Workers. Whereas 2 John 10 warns against supporting the
wrong people, John affirms Gaius’s work on the behalf of faithful
laborers, even though they are “strangers” (3 John 5).
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 5 these brothers. Traveling Christian workers. The early
church was centered on missionary outreach, otherwise it would not have
survived and spread (see Heb. 13:2).
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 6 Send . . . on their journey carries the sense of sending
with necessary financial support (see Rom. 15:24; 1 Cor. 16:6, 11; 2 Cor.
1:16; Titus 3:13). worthy of God. Those laboring for the gospel work not
for themselves but for the One who sends them.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 7 the name. The very person of God himself. John may
also be referring here to Christ, highlighting his deity. Compare Acts 5:41
and Phil. 2:9. The workers accepted nothing from the Gentiles, that is, the
non-Christians. Like Paul, the workers did not want to be accused of
ministering for personal gain (compare 1 Cor. 9:14–15; 2 Cor. 11:8; 1
Thess. 2:9).
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 8 the truth. The gospel message (see Col. 1:5).
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 9–10 Concern about Diotrephes. John and Gaius
knew people who opposed the progress of God’s kingdom.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 10 not content with that. Sinful personal ambition is
never satisfied but seeks to expand. refuses to welcome the brothers.
Stands in the way of the support of traveling Christian workers.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 11–12 Advice and Commendation of Demetrius. As
John ends his short letter, he introduces and commends his faithful
messenger.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 11 do not imitate evil. Probably an encouragement not to
give in to Diotrephes or to behave like he does.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 12 Normal postal service could not be entrusted with
Christian correspondence like this letter, so someone like Demetrius served
as courier. Phoebe probably served this function in delivering Romans
(Rom. 16:1–2), and Tychicus likely hand-carried Ephesians (Eph. 6:21–22)
and Colossians (Col. 4:7–8).
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 13–15 Closing: A Promise to Visit. John echoes his
words in 2 John 12. Sometimes pastoral oversight requires physical
presence.
3 JOHN—NOTE ON 15 friends. An unusual term for fellow believers; but see
John 15:15. each by name. John’s pastoral care is personal.
Jude
J u d e
(return to table of contents)
Introduction to Jude
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Key Themes
Outline
Global Message of Jude
Jude and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Jude
The Global Message of Jude for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Jude
Introduction to Jude
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
The book was written by Jude, the brother of James and Jesus (see Matt.
13:55; Mark 6:3, where “Judas” is the same in Greek as “Jude”). Jude was
probably written in the mid-60s A.D. Considering the letter’s apparent
Jewish perspective, Jude’s audience was probably Jewish Christians, or a
mixture of Jewish and Gentile readers where the Gentiles were familiar
with Jewish traditions.
Since Jude addresses a situation similar to the one addressed by 2 Peter
and exhibits a literary relationship to ch. 2 of that letter (Jude may have
been a source for 2 Peter), the two letters are commonly dated in fairly
close proximity, even though evidence for the date of writing within the
book of Jude is sparse.
Theme
The church must defend the one true faith (v. 3). Believers must be faithful
to the end by resisting false teachers and following the truth.
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Jude warns against following false teachers who have infiltrated the church
and are distorting the one true faith. Jude calls the church to defend the truth
aggressively against such false teaching.
While the false teachers of Jude were profoundly libertine (morally
unrestrained), it would be historically inaccurate to argue that they were
Gnostics. This heretical sect (or group of sects) was influential primarily
from the second century A.D. onward.
Jude accomplishes his purpose by drawing analogies with OT events,
using the same principles of interpretation found in 2 Peter (and elsewhere
in the NT). He also draws on Jewish apocalyptic traditions from nonbiblical
literature (he refers to 1 Enoch and the Testament of Moses) in building his
case. Thus, as literature, Jude has a distinctively Jewish flavor.
The format is of a NT epistle (letter), with its loose divisions of
salutation, body, and closing. But the central unit of the letter (vv. 5–16) fits
the style of a judgment oracle: it has an object of attack, an attack coming
from several directions, a harsh tone, and an implied standard on which the
attack is being conducted (“the faith that was once for all delivered to the
saints”; v. 3). The description of those who left the faith (vv. 8–16) provides
a picture of their character and actions. The use of images and allusions
(e.g., to Sodom and Gomorrah and the archangel Michael) lends a poetic
quality to the letter.
The writer displays horror over the apostasy and the false teachers who
have caused it. The only NT passage that goes beyond Jude in these traits is
Jesus’ denunciation of the religious leaders in Matthew 23. But this letter
begins with the usual soothing notes of NT epistles, and in the last two
verses it becomes one of the most moving benedictions in the NT.
Key Themes
1. Christians need to defend the doctrines of the faith (v. 3).
2. False teachers may be identified by their immoral character (vv. 4, 8,
10, 12–13, 16, 18–19).
3. God will judge false teachers (vv. 4, 5–7, 11, 14–15).
4. Saints must endure to be saved (vv. 17–23).
5. As God grants mercy to those who are called, they must show mercy
to others (vv. 2, 21–23).
6. God grants the grace to ensure that his people will persevere (vv. 1–2,
24–25).
Outline
I. Initial Greeting (vv. 1–2)
II. Jude’s Appeal: Contend for the Faith (vv. 3–4)
III. The Immoral Character and Resulting Judgment of the False Teachers
(vv. 5–16)
IV . Concluding Exhortations (vv. 17–25)
The Global Message of Jude
The global message of Jude is that the church must work, locally all the
way up to internationally, to defend the faith. For false teaching leads to
immorality, but true believers will persevere, by God’s grace, to the end.
Jude and Redemptive History
Despite its brevity, Jude’s letter is filled with a rich awareness of the history
of salvation that God has been working out through the ages. Jude speaks of
the “common salvation” that “was once for all delivered to the saints” (Jude
3), reminding his readers of the faith that has been handed down through
the generations. Throughout the letter Jude then refers to several figures and
places in Old Testament history, such as Adam, Cain, Moses, Balaam,
Enoch, Sodom and Gomorrah, and Egypt.
Jude is also aware that in his own time something decisively new has
dawned. With the coming of “our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ” (Jude
4), salvation has been revealed in a clearer and more abundant way than
ever before. Indeed, we are now “in the last time” (v. 18). The new age has
begun. The newness of Christ’s coming has strong connections, however,
with the past. For Christ himself, the second Person of the Trinity, was
active in Old Testament redemptive history. Jude refers to him as the one
who saved Israel and brought them out of the land of Egypt, and then
destroyed the rebellious (v. 5).
Universal Themes in Jude
Defending the faith. Jude opens his letter by exhorting his readers to
“contend for the faith that was once for all delivered to the saints” (Jude 3).
The need for such contending arises not from the world but from within the
church—“certain people have crept in” (v. 4). Many of the greatest dangers
to the church around the world come not from outside her walls but from
inside. As Jesus said, there are wolves in the church that look like sheep
(Matt. 7:15). Despite acting subversively rather than openly, false teachers
can easily be identified by their godlessness. They are “grumblers,
malcontents, following their own sinful desires” (Jude 16). Jude reminds his
readers, and us, that the apostles predicted that such false teachers would
arise (vv. 17–18). The church must not be swept into falsehood and
godlessness but must persevere in the love of God (v. 21), receiving mercy
from Jesus and extending mercy to others (vv. 22–23).
The nature of grace. The false teachers who have infiltrated the church
“pervert the grace of our God into sensuality” (Jude 4). The gospel is so
radical, justifying the ungodly (Rom. 4:5), that taking grace in this godless
direction has been a perennial danger to the church. Paul seems to have
combatted this error in Romans (Rom. 5:20–6:23). Yet the grace of God,
when truly received and enjoyed in all its freeness by the power of the Holy
Spirit, does not encourage sinning. It rather transforms sinners and gives
them a distaste for sin. Jude returns to the nature of true grace at the end of
his letter when he reminds his readers of “the love of God” and “the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ” (Jude 21) in the context of exhorting them toward
holiness (vv. 22–23; contrast v. 16). God’s grace is not a license to sin. For
grace is not only a pardon that forgives but a power that transforms. It
cannot be one without the other.
The Global Message of Jude for Today
“Contend for the faith that was once for all delivered to the saints” (Jude 3).
The church today does well to receive this exhortation. Amid the swirling
and conflicting claims to truth in the world today, including even the claim
that no one religion can claim the full truth, the church must contend for the
faith. This especially includes contending for truth within the church itself,
protecting believers against false doctrine. For false doctrine always brings
godlessness along with it.
At the same time, we note what Jude says immediately prior to exhorting
the church to contend for the faith. He begins, “Beloved, although I was
very eager to write to you about our common salvation, I found it necessary
to write appealing to you to contend for the faith” (Jude 3). Jude did not
write the letter he wanted to write. He wished to write a letter that exulted
in those things about which he and his readers agreed.
This is instructive for the church today. We must contend for the faith, yet
we must avoid the word-wars and quarrels against which the New
Testament warns us (1 Tim. 4:6–7; 6:3–4; 2 Tim. 2:14, 23–26; Titus 3:9;
James 4:1). Our first impulse should be to exult together in our common
salvation. As believers today from across the globe interact with one
another—interaction that is increasingly possible in this digital age—our
instincts must be those of Jude. We must not hesitate to contend for the faith
when it is endangered by false teaching.
Yet there is a common salvation that all true believers share, and we
should rejoice over that. Many secondary matters may distinguish us:
ethnicity, political persuasion, social class, worldview assumptions,
denominational affiliation. But we are one in Christ, all saved by grace into
his body, the church.
Through it all, the grace that has rescued us, says Jude, will preserve us.
God in his mercy will not only transform us; he himself will also keep us
from stumbling and present us before his divine glory with great joy (Jude
24). “To the only God, our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory,
majesty, dominion, and authority, before all time and now and forever” (v.
25).
Greeting