ACTS 19 [†]And it happened that while t Apollos was at Corinth, Paul
passed u through the inland [1] country and came to Ephesus. There he
found some disciples. 2[†]And he said to them, v “Did you receive the Holy
Spirit when you believed?” And they said, “No, w we have not even heard
that there is a Holy Spirit.” 3And he said, x “Into what then were you
baptized?” They said, “Into y John’s baptism.” 4And Paul said, y “John
baptized with the baptism of repentance, telling the people z to believe in
the one who was to come after him, that is, Jesus.” 5[†]On hearing this,
a they were baptized in [2] the name of the Lord Jesus. 6[†]And b when Paul
had laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and c they began
speaking in tongues and d prophesying. 7There were about twelve men in
all.
8And e he entered the synagogue and for three months spoke boldly,
reasoning and persuading them f about the kingdom of God. 9[†] g But when
some became stubborn and h continued in unbelief, speaking evil of i the
Way before the congregation, he withdrew from them and took the disciples
with him, reasoning daily in the hall of Tyrannus. [3] 10[†]This continued for
j two years, so that k all the residents of Asia heard the word of the Lord,
both Jews and Greeks.
The Sons of Sceva
11And l God was doing extraordinary miracles by the hands of Paul,
12[†] l so that even handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his skin were
carried away to the sick, and their diseases left them and m the evil spirits
came out of them. 13[†]Then some of the itinerant Jewish n exorcists
o undertook to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil
spirits, saying, p “I adjure you by the Jesus whom Paul proclaims.” 14Seven
sons of a Jewish high priest named Sceva were doing this. 15[†]But the evil
spirit answered them, q “Jesus I know, and Paul I recognize, but who are
you?” 16And the man in whom was the evil spirit leaped on them, mastered
all [4] of them and overpowered them, so that they fled out of that house
naked and wounded. 17And this became known to all the residents of
Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks. And fear fell upon them all, and r the name
of the Lord Jesus was extolled. 18Also many of those who were now
believers came, s confessing and divulging their practices. 19[†]And a
number of those who had practiced magic arts brought their books together
and burned them in the sight of all. And they counted the value of them and
found it came to fifty thousand pieces of silver.
20So the word of the Lord
t continued to increase and prevail mightily.
A Riot at Ephesus
21[†]Now after these events Paul resolved in the Spirit u to pass through
v Macedonia and Achaia and w go to Jerusalem, saying, “After I have been
there, x I must also see Rome.” 22[†]And having sent into Macedonia two of
y his helpers, z Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia a for a while.
23[†]About that time b there arose no little disturbance concerning c the
Way.
24[†]For a man named Demetrius, a silversmith, who made silver
shrines of Artemis, d brought no little business to the craftsmen. 25 d These
he gathered together, with the workmen in similar trades, and said, “Men,
you know that from this business we have our wealth. 26And you see and
hear that not only in Ephesus but in almost all of Asia this Paul has
persuaded and turned away a great many people, e saying that f gods made
with hands are not gods. 27And there is danger not only that this trade of
ours may come into disrepute but also that the temple of the g great goddess
Artemis may be counted as nothing, and that she may even be deposed from
her magnificence, she whom all Asia and the world worship.”
28[†]When they heard this they were enraged and were crying out,
g “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” 29[†]So the city was filled with the
confusion, and they rushed together into the theater, dragging with them
Gaius and h Aristarchus, Macedonians who were Paul’s i companions in
travel. 30But when Paul wished to go in among the crowd, the disciples
would not let him. 31[†]And even some of the Asiarchs, [5] who were friends
of his, sent to him and were urging him not to venture into the theater.
32
j Now some cried out one thing, some another, for the assembly was in
confusion, and most of them did not know why they had come together.
33[†]Some of the crowd prompted Alexander, whom the Jews had put
forward. And Alexander, k motioning with his hand, wanted to make a
defense to the crowd. 34But when they recognized that he was a Jew, for
about two hours they all cried out with one voice, l “Great is Artemis of the
Ephesians!”
35[†]And when the town clerk had quieted the crowd, he said, “Men of
Ephesus, who is there who does not know that the city of the Ephesians is
temple keeper of the great Artemis, and of the sacred stone that fell from
m the sky? [6] 36Seeing then that these things cannot be denied, you ought to
be quiet and do nothing rash. 37For you have brought n these men here who
are neither o sacrilegious nor blasphemers of our goddess. 38[†]If therefore
Demetrius and the craftsmen with him have a complaint against anyone, the
courts are open, and there are p proconsuls. Let them bring charges against
one another.
39But if you seek anything further, [7] it shall be settled in the
regular assembly.
40For we really are in danger of being charged with
rioting today, since there is no cause that we can give to justify this
commotion.” 41And when he had said these things, he dismissed the
assembly.
Paul in Macedonia and Greece