AMOS 3 [†] j Hear this word that the LORD has spoken against you, O people
of Israel, against the whole family that I brought up out of the land of
Egypt:
2 k “You only have I known
of all the families of the earth;
l therefore I will punish you
for all your iniquities.
3[†] “Do two walk together,
unless they have agreed to meet?
4 Does a lion roar in the forest,
when he has no prey?
Does a young lion cry out from his den,
if he has taken nothing?
5 Does a bird fall in a snare on the earth,
when there is no trap for it?
Does a snare spring up from the ground,
when it has taken nothing?
6
m Is a trumpet blown in a city,
and the people are not afraid?
n Does disaster come to a city,
unless the LORD has done it?
7 “For the Lord GOD does nothing
o without revealing his secret
to his servants the prophets.
8 The lion has roared;
who will not fear?
p The Lord GOD has spoken;
who can but prophesy?”
9[†] Proclaim to the strongholds in q Ashdod
and to the strongholds in the land of Egypt,
and say, “Assemble yourselves on r the mountains of Samaria,
and see the great tumults within her,
and s the oppressed in her midst.”
10 “They do not know how to do right,” declares the LORD,
t “those who store up violence and robbery in their strongholds.”
11Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
u “An adversary shall surround the land
and bring down [1] your defenses from you,
and v your strongholds shall be plundered.”
12Thus says the LORD: w “As the shepherd rescues from the mouth of the
lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, x so shall the people of Israel y who dwell
in Samaria be rescued, with the corner of a couch and part [2] of a bed.
13[†] “Hear, z and testify against the house of Jacob,”
declares the Lord GOD, a the God of hosts,
14[†] “that on the day I punish Israel for his transgressions,
b I will punish the altars of Bethel,
and c the horns of the altar shall be cut off
and fall to the ground.
15[†] d I will strike e the winter house along with f the summer house,
and g the houses of ivory shall perish,
and the great houses [3] shall come to an end,”
declares the LORD.