AMOS 2 [†]Thus says the LORD:
k “For three transgressions of j Moab,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment, [1]
because k he burned to lime
the bones of the king of Edom.
2 So I will send a fire upon Moab,
and it shall devour the strongholds of l Kerioth,
and Moab shall die amid uproar,
amid shouting and the sound of the trumpet;
3 m I will cut off the ruler from its midst,
and will kill m all its princes [2] with him,”
Judgment on Judah
4[†]Thus says the LORD:
n “For three transgressions of Judah,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment,
because o they have rejected the law of the LORD,
and have not kept his statutes,
but p their lies have led them astray,
those after which their fathers walked.
5 So q I will send a fire upon Judah,
and it shall devour the strongholds of Jerusalem.”
Judgment on Israel
6[†]Thus says the LORD:
n “For three transgressions of Israel,
and for four, I will not revoke the punishment,
because r they sell the righteous for s silver,
says the LORD.
says the LORD.
and the needy for a pair of sandals—
7[†] those who trample the head of the poor t into the dust of the earth
and u turn aside the way of the afflicted;
v a man and his father go in to the same girl,
so that my holy name is profaned;
8 they lay themselves down beside every altar
on garments w taken in pledge,
and in the house of their God they drink
the wine of those who have been fined.
9 “Yet x it was I who destroyed the Amorite before them,
y whose height was like the height of the cedars
and who was as strong as the oaks;
z I destroyed his fruit above
and his roots beneath.
10 a Also it was I who brought you up out of the land of Egypt
b and led you forty years in the wilderness,
x to possess the land of the Amorite.
11 And I raised up some of your sons for prophets,
and some of your young men for c Nazirites.
Is it not indeed so, O people of Israel?”
declares the LORD.
12 “But you made the Nazirites d drink wine,
and commanded the prophets,
saying, e ‘You shall not prophesy.’
13 “Behold, I will press you down in your place,
as a cart full of sheaves presses down.
14[†] f Flight shall perish from the swift,
f and the strong shall not retain his strength,
g nor shall the mighty save his life;
15 he who handles the bow shall not stand,
and he who is h swift of foot shall not save himself,
i nor shall he who rides the horse save his life;
16 and he who is stout of heart among the mighty
shall flee away naked in that day,”
declares the LORD.
Israel’s Guilt and Punishment