COLOSSIANS 4 [†]Masters, treat your bondservants justly and fairly,
knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
Further Instructions
2 c Continue steadfastly in prayer, being watchful in it d with thanksgiving.
3[†]At the same time, pray also for us, that God may e open to us a door for
the word, f to declare the mystery of Christ, g on account of which I am in
prison— 4that I may make it clear, which is how I ought to speak.
5[†] h Walk in wisdom toward i outsiders, making the best use of the time.
6Let your speech always j be gracious, k seasoned with salt, l so that you
may know how you ought to answer each person.
Final Greetings
7[†]Tychicus will tell you m all about my activities. He is a beloved brother
and faithful minister and fellow servant [1] in the Lord. 8I have sent him to
you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are and that he may
encourage your hearts, 9[†]and with him n Onesimus, our faithful and
o beloved brother, who is one of you. They will tell you of everything that
has taken place here.
10[†] p Aristarchus my fellow prisoner greets you, and Mark q the cousin
of Barnabas (concerning whom you have received instructions— r if he
comes to you, welcome him), 11and Jesus who is called s Justus. t These are
the only men of the circumcision among my fellow workers for the
kingdom of God, and u they have been a comfort to me. 12
v Epaphras, who
is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, greets you, always w struggling on
your behalf in his prayers, that you may stand x mature and fully assured in
all the will of God. 13[†]For I bear him witness that he has worked hard for
you and for those in Laodicea and in Hierapolis. 14[†] y Luke the beloved
physician greets you, as does z Demas. 15[†]Give my greetings to the
brothers [2] at Laodicea, and to Nympha and a the church in her house.
16[†]And when b this letter has been read among you, have it also read in
the church of the Laodiceans; and see that you also read the letter from
Laodicea. 17[†]And say to c Archippus, “See that you fulfill d the ministry
that you have received in the Lord.”
18[†]I, Paul, e write this greeting with my own hand. f Remember g my
chains. h Grace be with you.
Study Notes for Colossians
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:1–2 Greeting. As he often does, Paul begins by
asking God to pour out his grace and peace upon the Colossians.
FACT
Colossae was most likely the smallest city to receive a letter from Paul.
Located along the Lycus River about a hundred miles (161 km) east of
Ephesus, it was known for its wool production.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:1 Paul, an apostle. Paul has likely never been to
Colossae, but he feels a pastoral responsibility for this church. (See note on
v. 7.) He wants to help them deal with the dangerous teaching threatening
their health.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:2 Colossae. A city in Phrygia, in the Roman
province of Asia. It was on the Lycus River just over 100 miles (161 km)
east of Ephesus.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:3–8 Thanksgiving. Paul thanks God for the
Colossians and their expressions of faith, hope, and love.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:3 God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Paul emphasizes the lordship of Jesus Christ in this letter. He states that
Jesus is not a separate God, yet he has a uniquely close relationship with the
Father. He is the Son and works on behalf of God.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:4–5 faith . . . love . . . hope. Paul wrote often
about these three Christian virtues (see Rom. 5:1–5; 1 Cor. 13:13; Gal. 5:5–
6; 1 Thess. 1:3).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:6 in the whole world. The gospel has spread from
Jerusalem into Syria, Asia Minor, Greece, Italy, and probably into Egypt,
North Africa, and Persia as well.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:7 Paul did not start the church at Colossae. The
people heard the gospel from Epaphras (a shortened form of
“Epaphroditus”), a fellow Colossian (4:12). on your behalf. The esv
footnote indicates that some manuscripts read “on our behalf.” If this is the
original meaning, then Epaphras had been a faithful ambassador,
representing Paul among the Colossians.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:9–14 Prayer. Paul reports how he regularly
prays for the Colossians.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:9 Spiritual means given by the Holy Spirit.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:10 so as. The “wisdom and understanding” (v. 9)
would then lead to changed lives, for it would enable these Christians to
walk in a manner worthy of the Lord. “To walk” is a metaphor for
conducting or behaving oneself (compare Ps. 1:1). Paul calls believers “to
walk” in a way fully pleasing to the Lord Jesus Christ. Christians are
completely justified from the moment of initial saving faith, but they can do
things that either please or displease God every day. bearing fruit . . . and
increasing. See Mark 4:1–9, 13–20.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:11 be strengthened with all power. God, not
idols and demons, has “all power.” for all endurance and patience with
joy. God gives this power to help believers continue in the faith, resist
temptation and deceitful teachers, and know the joy of the Lord.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:12 share in the inheritance. God’s promise to
Israel under the old covenant (see Gen. 13:14–17; Num. 26:52–56); Paul
applies it to Gentiles under the new covenant. saints. “Holy ones” or
“consecrated people.”
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:13 He has delivered us. Just as God rescued his
people from slavery in Egypt under the old covenant (Ex. 6:6; 14:30), he
has now delivered them from the domain of darkness, that is, from Satan
and the powers of evil (see Acts 26:18). the kingdom of his beloved Son.
This is the same as the “kingdom of God” (or “kingdom of heaven”) that
Jesus spoke of (Matt. 3:2; Mark 1:15).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:14 redemption. Deliverance or release from
captivity. Believers have been rescued from condemnation and have
received forgiveness of their sins.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:15–20 Praise to Christ. In moving poetic
language, Paul praises the lordship of Christ over creation and
redemption. These verses may be part of an early Christian hymn.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:15 the image of the invisible God. Paul describes
Christ in terms similar to the presentation of “wisdom” in Proverbs 8.
firstborn of all creation. Paul does not claim that the Son was somehow
created rather than existing eternally with the Father and the Holy Spirit.
Paul has in mind the rights and privileges of a firstborn son, especially a
king’s son who would inherit a kingdom (compare Ps. 89:27).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:16 by him all things were created. Jesus cannot
be the first thing created, since he himself created “all things.” thrones or
dominions or rulers or authorities. Paul uses Jewish terms for various
rankings of angels. He probably refers to evil angels, since they play a
significant part in this letter (2:8, 10, 15, 20).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:17 in him all things hold together. Christ
continuously sustains his creation, preventing it from disintegrating
(compare Heb. 1:3).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:18 he is the head of the body. This metaphor
conveys Christ’s leadership over the church (see 1 Cor. 12:27; Eph. 1:22–
23; 5:25).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:19 For in him all the fullness of God was
pleased to dwell. The term “fullness” here and throughout the letter recalls
its use in the OT, where God “filled” the temple with his presence. Jesus not
only bears God’s glory, but all that God is also dwells in him. He is fully
God (see also 2:9).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:20 to reconcile to himself all things. As “Prince
of Peace” (Isa. 9:6), Jesus will ultimately defeat all rebellion against God.
For believers, this means reconciliation to God as his friends. For
nonbelievers and the demonic powers, this means defeat by Christ, the
conquering king (see 1 Cor. 15:24–28; Rev. 19:11–21; 20:7–10). The basis
for Christ’s reign of peace is the blood of his cross. The cross truly is the
turning point in human and cosmic history.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:21–23 Reconciliation to God. Paul explains
the meaning of reconciliation for the church.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:21–22 once . . . now. Paul presents a strong
contrast between the Colossians’ pre-Christian status and their favorable
situation now as Christians. to present you holy and blameless. This is the
same language the OT uses to describe the unblemished animals that priests
brought for a sacrifice.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:23 if indeed you continue in the faith. The
specific Greek phrase Paul uses here indicates that he fully expects the
Colossian believers will continue in the faith. in all creation. To both Jews
and Gentiles throughout the Greco-Roman world (compare v. 6).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:24–2:3 Paul’ s Labor for the Gospel. Paul
describes his own work for the gospel generally, and then more
specifically for the Colossians.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:24 Filling up what is lacking in Christ’s
afflictions does not mean there is any deficiency in Christ’s atoning death
and suffering on the cross (see Heb. 9:12, 24–26; 10:14). What was
“lacking” in Christ’s afflictions was the future suffering that Paul and others
will experience for the sake of the gospel. (Compare Phil. 2:30, where Paul
tells the Philippians that Epaphroditus risked his life “to complete what was
lacking in your service to me.”)
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:25 the stewardship from God. Paul views
himself as a divinely chosen “steward” or “administrator.” This word was
used widely in the Roman world for the administrator of a large household
or estate. Paul’s responsibility was to make the word of God fully known.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:26–27 The mystery refers to God’s unfolding plan
for the world and for redemption through the Messiah (see 2:2; 4:3; Eph.
1:9; 3:9; 6:19). Key aspects of God’s plan were hidden for ages and
generations. They were a mystery that had to be revealed by God. Similar
language occurs often in the book of Daniel. At the heart of the mystery is
the amazing result of the new covenant, Christ in you, the hope of glory.
God himself, in the person of Christ, will be directly and personally present
in the lives of his people. His presence assures them of a future life with
him when he returns.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 1:29 Paul is struggling with all his [Christ’s]
energy to help the Colossians grow and mature in Christ.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:1 for those at Laodicea. Laodicea was the nearest
city to Colossae, only 9 miles (14.5 km) away (see note on Rev. 3:14–22).
There was a close relationship between these churches.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:2 The false teachers probably claimed special
knowledge of the mysteries of God’s truth. Paul insists that Christ is God’s
mystery. All understanding is found in him.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:3 in whom are hidden all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. Jesus is the ultimate keeper of divine wisdom and
spiritual knowledge. Compare Prov. 2:3–6.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:4–23 The Dangerous Teaching at Colossae. Paul
delivers a series of warnings about the teaching that threatens the Colossian
church. In doing so, he also provides important teaching on the Christians’
new identity in Christ. This will help them resist the false teachers’
arguments and live in a way that pleases the Lord.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:4 that no one may delude you with plausible
arguments. What the teacher(s) are saying sounds right, but it is still false.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:5 good order . . . firmness. The Colossians should
be like troops ready for battle.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:6–7 you received Christ Jesus the Lord. Paul
reminds the Colossians of the foundational teaching of Epaphras when they
first became Christians. At the heart of this is the confession that Jesus
Christ is Lord (1 Cor. 12:3).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:8 See to it that no one takes you captive. “Takes
you captive” translates a Greek word commonly used of stealing a ship’s
cargo. philosophy. The Greek for this word suggests the faction’s leaders
called their teaching “the philosophy.” Paul is not condemning all
traditional Greek philosophical schools (for example, Platonism, Stoicism,
Aristotelianism). His remarks are focused on the particular teaching at
Colossae. the elemental spirits of the world. Paul likely is referring to
demonic spirits.
“In Christ”: A Central Theme in Colossians
1:14 in whom we have redemption
1:16 in him all things were created
1:19 in him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell
1:22 reconciled in his body of flesh
2:3 in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
2:6 walk in him
2:7 rooted and built up in him
2:9 in him all the fullness of deity dwells bodily
2:10 you have been filled in him
2:11 you were circumcised in him
2:12 in him you were raised up
2:15 triumphing over them in him
3:20 pleasing in the Lord
4:7 fellow servant in the Lord
4:17 the ministry that you have received in the Lord
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:9 in him the whole fullness of deity dwells
bodily. Jesus is God in the flesh (see 1:15–20).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:10 you have been filled in him. Believers share in
Christ’s power and authority over every rule and authority through their
union with him. Here is the letter’s main theme. The divine “fullness” is in
Christ (v. 9), and believers are “filled in him.” They have everything they
need in Christ. The term head is clearly used here with the sense of
“authority over” (see note on 1 Cor. 11:3).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:11 In him also you were circumcised. Paul here
uses circumcision to picture a spiritual (made without hands) action. He
describes it as putting off the body of the flesh. Believers no longer live in
the power and under the influence of the flesh (Gal. 5:24). They have been
transferred to Christ’s kingdom and live through and in him, under his
lordship (Col. 1:13).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:12–13 buried with him in baptism . . . also
raised with him. . . . made alive together with him. Baptism represents an
identification with Christ in his death (compare Rom. 6:4–6). It also
symbolizes his resurrection (compare Eph. 2:6). Dying and rising with
Christ symbolizes death to the power of sin and Satan as well as strength to
live a new life (see Rom. 6:3–11).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:14 record of debt. Paul uses this legal term to
describe each person’s debt to God because of sin. God himself has
mercifully resolved this debt by nailing it to the cross, where Jesus paid
the penalty. The image comes from the notices posted on a cross by the
Roman authorities. These declared the crime for which the criminal was
being executed (see John 19:19–22).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:15 He disarmed the rulers and authorities. On
the cross, demonic powers were stripped of their power to accuse Christians
before God. put them to open shame. This is the same term used in Matt.
1:19 to refer to Joseph’s unwillingness to expose Mary to public shame. The
cross publicly reveals the failure of the demonic powers to defeat God’s
plan of salvation through Christ (see 1 Cor. 2:6–8).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:16 food and drink . . . a festival or a new moon
or a Sabbath. The false teacher(s) claimed that some Jewish ceremonies
were essential for spiritual advancement. On “new moon,” see note on
Num. 28:11–15.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:17 a shadow of the things to come. The old
covenant ceremonies pointed to a future reality that was fulfilled in the
Lord Jesus Christ (compare Heb. 10:1). Thus Christians are no longer under
the Mosaic covenant (see Rom. 6:14–15; 2 Cor. 3:4–18; Gal. 3:15–4:7).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:18 Paul lists a variety of ways the false teachers
had tried to disqualify the genuine believers in Colossae. asceticism. Paul
probably had in mind fasting and perhaps the rules mentioned in v. 21.
worship of angels. Asking angels for help and protection from evil spirits.
FACT
Worship of angels. Many Colossians greatly feared evil spirits. In order
to control the spirits and to avoid affliction, they called on angels for help
and protection (2:18). Paul reminds them of Christ’s supremacy in
dealing with demonic powers (1:13–14; 2:15)
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:19 not holding fast to the Head. The false teacher
at Colossae has not maintained contact with Christ. Thus the teacher has
become influenced by evil spirits (see v. 8). On the church as a body, see
Rom. 12:5–8; 1 Corinthians 12; Eph. 4:4, 12–16.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:20 the elemental spirits. See note on v. 8.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:21 “Do not handle, Do not taste, Do not touch.
”
Specific rules the teacher of the false philosophy insists the Colossians must
obey. God does not give these rules; under the new covenant, the food a
person eats is not important in his or her spiritual life (see Mark 7:18–19).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 2:23 severity to the body. The fasting and rules that
were part of the behavior encouraged by “the philosophy.” It may also have
included forms of self-mutilation similar to what was practiced in some of
the local cults.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:1–4 The Proper Focus: Christ and the Life
Above. This section is a bridge to Paul’s appeals to live in a way that
pleases the Lord.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:1–2 raised with Christ. See 2:13–14. Christ is
now seated at the right hand of God (Ps. 110:1; Eph. 1:20). He has a
position of authority. He makes requests to the Father for believers.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:3 your life is hidden with Christ in God. Paul
uses Isaiah and the Psalms to express the security of believers as they trust
in Christ (Isa. 49:2; Ps. 27:5–6; 31:19–20).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:5–4:6 Instructions on Living the Christian Life.
Christians have died and risen with Christ. They have the hope of a future
life with him. Paul encourages the Colossians to continue eliminating sinful
behaviors from their lives and continue increasing in Christian virtues.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:5 Put to death. Because believers have died with
Christ (2:20; 3:3), they can overcome sinful practices (Rom. 6:11; 8:13).
sexual immorality. Every kind of sexual activity outside of marriage.
which is idolatry. Greed, sexual sin, and other vices can take God’s place
as a focus of devotion.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:6 the wrath of God is coming. The OT prophets
spoke of the approaching day of the Lord as a time of wrath (e.g., Zeph.
1:14–15). God will hold everyone accountable for his or her actions.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:8 put them all away. Paul lists five more vices
(see v. 5) that Christians need to renounce. These are all related to
relationships among believers.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:9–10 seeing that you have put off the old self . . .
and have put on the new self. The Greek grammar indicates that this is an
event that has already taken place. A change of identity has already
occurred in believers’ lives. Now they must bring their behavior into line
with their new identity (see also Rom. 6:6; Eph. 4:24). Being renewed
indicates that the transformation of Christians is an ongoing process.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:11 Here there is not Greek and Jew. There are
no distinctions of status or race among the new covenant people (see Gal.
3:28). Scythian. A people group living along the northern coast of the
Black Sea. To the Greeks, the Scythians were violent, uneducated,
uncivilized, and inferior. Jesus, who is all, and in all, binds all Christians
together in equality.
FACT
The Scythians (3:11) lived about 500 miles (805 km) north of Colossae
along the Black Sea coast. The Greeks thought of them as violent,
uneducated, uncivilized people. In contrast, Paul states that Christ binds
all people from all nations together in unity through his love. Racial and
cultural prejudice has no place among Christians.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:12–17 Paul calls the Colossians to a holy lifestyle,
consistent with their new identity.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:13 forgiving each other . . . as the Lord has
forgiven you. See Matt. 6:14–15.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:14 Above all else, Christians are called on to love
one another (see 1 Corinthians 13). Binds . . . together seems to suggest
that love unites all the virtues.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:16 The word of Christ probably refers to the
teaching about Christ as well as his own words. Both were part of the oral
traditions passed on to early believers. Psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs (see note on Eph. 5:19) is one way of teaching and admonishing.
These were particularly important in the oral culture of Paul’s day.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:18–4:1 Paul gives special instructions for the
members of a Christian household. He addresses wives and husbands,
children and fathers, and slaves (or bondservants) and masters. It is
important to note that he treats women, children, and bondservants as equal
with the male members of the Christian household. See Eph. 5:22–6:9. On
bondservants, see esv Preface.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:18 Wives, submit to your husbands. It was
typical in Roman households to tell wives to “obey.” Paul appeals to them
to “submit,” based on his conviction that men have a God-given leadership
role in the family (see Eph. 5:22–33). However, Paul is not simply telling
wives to follow the cultural patterns of the day; he tells them to live as is
fitting in the Lord. Seven times in Col. 3:18–4:1, Paul bases his
instructions on “in the Lord” or an equivalent term. Everything must be
evaluated in light of Christ and his teaching.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:19 do not be harsh with them. Violence, threats,
and unkind words are not acceptable in a Christian home. Husbands are
called to love their wives as Christ loved the church (Eph. 5:25).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:20 Paul’s words to children reflect the fifth
commandment (Ex. 20:12).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:21 do not provoke your children. A father’s
negative emotions and actions can cause a child to be discouraged (see Eph.
6:4).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 3:22–25 Bondservants, obey in everything those
who are your earthly masters. God has ordered family relationships from
creation, and Paul’s instructions on marriage represent the perfect will of
God. On the other hand, the kind of servitude practiced in the first century
was seldom in keeping with God’s will. The Scriptures address the situation
without supporting it (see notes on 1 Cor. 7:21; Eph. 6:5; 1 Tim. 1:10). Both
Testaments condemn the evil of human trafficking. There were many
bondservants at Colossae. Paul treats them with dignity and appeals to them
to honor Christ in their hearts, work, and behavior. Philemon (see the book
of Philemon) was a wealthy Colossian who benefited from the labors of his
bondservant Onesimus. The principles of Col. 3:22–4:1 apply to employers
and employees today.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:1 treat your bondservants justly and fairly. Paul
does not approve of the Roman system of servitude. Instead, he provides
instructions to believing masters and servants regarding their relationship to
each other in the Lord (see note on Eph. 6:5). On bondservants, see esv
Preface.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:3–4 that God may open to us a door for the
word. Paul asks the Colossians to pray that he will have opportunities to
share the good news of Jesus Christ (Eph. 6:18–20; 2 Thess. 3:1). to
declare the mystery. See note on Col. 1:26–27.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:5–6 seasoned with salt. Compare Matt. 5:13. The
metaphor suggests giving a powerful and attractive testimony to non-
Christians.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:7–17 Personal Greetings and Instructions.
After praising the “letter carriers,” Paul sends greetings from the ministry
associates who are with him during his imprisonment.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:7–8 Tychicus was a native of Asia Minor. He was
a member of Paul’s ministry team (Acts 20:4). He will carry this letter, as
well as Ephesians and Philemon (see Eph. 6:21–22), and bring them news
about Paul.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:9 Onesimus. This was Philemon’s converted
bondservant (see notes on Philemon).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:10–11 Mark the cousin of Barnabas. This is the
same person as “John Mark.” He went with Paul on his first missionary
journey, but suddenly left (Acts 13:13). Paul and Barnabas had a
disagreement about taking him again (Acts 15:39). Paul’s view of Mark has
changed, probably because Mark has changed. Now Mark ministers with
Paul again. Jesus who is called Justus is otherwise unknown. men of the
circumcision. Jewish Christians.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:13 in Laodicea and in Hierapolis. Towns near
Colossae in the Lycus Valley (on Laodicea, see 2:1). Both churches had
close relationships with the church at Colossae.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:14 Luke the beloved physician is the same Luke
who wrote Luke and Acts (see 2 Tim. 4:11; Philem. 24). He went with Paul
on some of his journeys. He was apparently with Paul during his
imprisonments in Caesarea and Rome. Since Luke is not identified among
“the only men of the circumcision” (Col. 4:9–11), he was probably a
Gentile. Demas later deserted Paul (2 Tim. 4:10).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:15 Nympha and the church in her house. On
house churches, see note on 1 Cor. 16:19.
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:16 when this letter has been read among you.
Public reading in the churches points to the authority of Paul’s letters. It
also assumes they were written to be understood by ordinary believers. The
letter from Laodicea probably refers to a letter Paul wrote to Laodicea that
is now lost.
FACT
Paul’s letter to Laodicea was probably lost, though some think it could be
the same letter as Ephesians. Regardless, Paul expected that his letter to
the Colossians would also be read aloud to the Laodiceans (4:15–16).
Laodicea and Colossae were about 9 miles (14.5 km) apart (see also Rev.
1:11; 3:14).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:17 Archippus may have been the son of Philemon
and Apphia (see Philem. 2).
COLOSSIANS—NOTE ON 4:18 Closing. Paul ends his letter by asking the
Colossian Christians to pray for him. I, Paul, write this greeting with
my own hand. Timothy has probably been Paul’s secretary to this point
(see 1:1). Paul now signs the letter personally (compare 1 Cor. 16:21; 2
Thess. 3:17).
1 Thessalonians
(return to table of contents)
1 Thessalonians 1 • 1 Thessalonians 2 • 1 Thessalonians 3
•
1 Thessalonians 4 • 1 Thessalonians 5
Introduction to 1 Thessalonians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of 1 Thessalonians
Global Message of 1 Thessalonians
First Thessalonians and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in 1 Thessalonians
The Global Message of 1 Thessalonians for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to 1 Thessalonians
Introduction to 1 Thessalonians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Paul wrote this letter to the church in Thessalonica. He probably wrote in A.D.
49–51 from Corinth during his second missionary journey (Acts 18:1–18).
Theme
The main theme is Jesus’ second coming. When he returns, the dead who have
believed in Christ will rise and will join the living to meet the Lord in the air
(4:15–17). Unbelievers will experience God’s wrath, while believers will
inherit salvation (1:10; 5:2–4, 9–10). In preparation for that great day,
Christians are called to be holy and blameless (3:11–4:8; 5:23). God, who is
faithful, will produce in them the holiness he requires (5:24).
Purpose
Paul has received a report from Timothy about the Thessalonian church. Paul
writes to them to restore their hope, which has been tested by unexpected
deaths in the church. He reassures them that both the dead and the living
believers will be safe at the second coming (4:13–5:11). In addition, Paul wants
(1) to stress the authenticity of himself, Silas, and Timothy as preachers of the
gospel (1:5; 2:1–12; 2:17–3:10); (2) to teach them that persecution is normal
for Christians (3:3–4); and (3) to challenge them to take responsibility for
earning their own living (4:9–12).
Key Themes
1. God’s wrath comes on those who reject the gospel (2:16; 5:3).
2. Jesus’ death and resurrection are the basis for the Christian’s hope (4:14;
5:10).
3. Christians are destined not for wrath but for salvation when Christ returns
(1:10; 5:4, 9).
4. Christians who die will participate fully in the second coming (4:14–17;
5:10).
5. Those who respond to the gospel have been elected and called by God.
They continue to be called by God throughout their lives (1:4; 2:12; 4:7;
5:9, 24).
6. Christians should live lives of complete holiness (3:13; 4:3–8; 5:23).
7. Christians must never ignore their responsibility to work (4:9–12; 5:14).
8. The truth of the gospel is confirmed by the integrity of its preachers (1:5;
2:1–12).
9. Joy, especially in suffering, is a mark of the Christian (1:6; 5:16).
10. Christians experience the realities of the new covenant (4:8–9).
11. Faith, hope, and love are essential traits of the Christian (1:2–3; 5:8).
Outline
I. Opening (1:1)
II. Thanksgiving and Encouragement (1:2–3:13)
III. Instruction and Exhortation (4:1–5:28)
The Setting of 1 Thessalonians
c. A.D. 49–51
Paul wrote 1 Thessalonians from Corinth near the end of his second
missionary journey. Paul and his companions had established the church in
Thessalonica but were forced to leave by opponents of the gospel. Later, Paul
sent Timothy back to Thessalonica to check on the church there, and Timothy’s
report led Paul to write this letter. Thessalonica enjoyed privileged status as the
capital of Macedonia and was located on a natural harbor along the busy east-
west Egnatian Way.
The Global Message of 1
Thessalonians
Jesus’ work delivers believers from the coming day of the Lord, when
God’s wrath will be revealed. Abiding in such hope strengthens God’s
people to endure whatever adversity they face. Looking back at Christ’s
work on the cross and looking forward to his second coming, believers
around the world live patiently in the present, in love and holiness. This is
the global message of 1 Thessalonians.
First Thessalonians and Redemptive History
Throughout Paul’s first letter to the Thessalonian church he speaks of the
redemptive work of Christ. Jesus “delivers us from the wrath to come” (1
Thess. 1:10). He “died for us” to bring us back to God (5:10). In 1
Thessalonians as elsewhere, Paul views Christ’s death and resurrection as
the climax of all human history.
Jesus’ coming two thousand years ago will not be his only coming,
however. His life, death, and resurrection launched the new age longed for
by the Old Testament prophets (see Jer. 31:31–34). And someday, his
second coming will complete his redemptive and restorative work. It is this
second coming that is especially emphasized in 1 Thessalonians. It is
mentioned in every chapter of the letter (1 Thess. 1:10; 2:19–20; 3:13;
4:13–18; 5:1–11, 23–24).
The letter of 1 Thessalonians gives us a grand view of redemptive
history, stretching from the Old Testament, through the first coming of
Christ, to his second coming and the end of world history as we know it—a
time when sin, sickness, and death will be no more.
Universal Themes in 1 Thessalonians
Love for others. Paul mentions the Thessalonians’ faith, hope, and love at
both the beginning and the end of his letter to them (1 Thess. 1:3; 5:13), but
throughout the letter his main focus is on love (3:6, 12; 4:9). Paul stresses
that love is the fundamental mark of Christian living. He reminds the
Thessalonian believers that he has always related to them with the affection
of a mother and the tender exhortation of a father (2:6–12). What he says in
the letter about Christ’s second coming ought not to overshadow this crucial
call to love. It would indeed be tragic and ironic for believers to debate the
precise details of Christ’s second coming in a loveless way. The church
around the world today can never outgrow the exhortation to love as we
have been loved (Eph. 5:2). This is the key mark of Christ’s disciples (1
John 4:7–8).
Christ’ s second coming. At numerous points throughout 1 Thessalonians
Paul returns to the theme of the second coming of Christ, or “the day of the
Lord” (1 Thess. 5:2; see also 1:10; 2:19–20; 3:13; 4:13–18; 5:2–7, 23–24).
The phrase “the day of the Lord” is common in the Old Testament prophets.
It refers to the day when God will punish his enemies and vindicate his
people (e.g., Isa. 13:3–16; 27:2–13; Joel 1:13–15; 2:31–32; Mal. 4:5). Hope
in this coming day is a source of encouragement to Christians around the
world facing various forms of adversity and opposition. When we encounter
problems such as self-serving landlords, fraudulent business practices,
corrupt political systems, and inter-ethnic strife, we can still have hope and
we can forgive those who oppress us, knowing that one day all will be put
right. Justice will prevail.
Holiness. Paul not only describes the hope of the coming day of the Lord.
He also exhorts the Thessalonians to conduct themselves in godly ways in
light of this hope. Christians are “children of light, children of the day” (1
Thess. 5:5)—they have been redeemed from their sin and have been given
new life in God’s dawning kingdom. If this is true, Paul reasons, then they
must live lives of holiness (5:1–11), including sexual holiness (4:1–8).
Their lives should exhibit the faith, love, and hope they have because of
Christ (1:3; 5:8).
The Global Message of 1 Thessalonians for Today
Paul shows deep affection and concern in 1 Thessalonians. He was not an
aloof or detached theologian. As a missionary and church planter engaged
at a deep heart-level with the people he had led to Christ, he wanted to see
the message of salvation brought into those corners of the world where
Jesus was not yet known (Rom. 15:20; 1 Cor. 3:10). As the global church
receives and reflects on Paul’s first letter to the Thessalonians, seeking to
carry forward the gospel to the world today, two great themes rise to the
surface: our central calling in the present and our glorious hope for the
future.
Our present calling: love. Our main calling as Christians in this present
life is love. Paul loved the men and women who came to know and trust
Christ. Paul then called these believers to love one another. It is by this kind
of love, the Bible tells us, that the unbelieving nations of the world will sit
up and take notice of the church. “By this all people will know that you are
my disciples,” said Jesus—“if you have love for one another” (John 13:35).
Not eloquent preaching, not superior intellect, not clever arguments, not
human applause: love. As the church today follows Paul’s call to “increase
and abound in love for one another” (1 Thess. 3:12), in light of the gospel
and through the power of the Spirit, the Christian church will be noticed by
a watching world. Love for one another, beyond anything else, is our great
and joyous call.
Our glorious hope: Christ’ s return. The great hope for the future is
Christ’s second coming. Even when we are afflicted with all kinds of
difficulties, we know we will see Jesus return to earth in power and glory
(Rev. 19:11–16). This is a comfort that overcomes any adversity of this
fallen world. This is true, not because the adversity we face is trivial. On the
contrary, the world today faces some of the greatest challenges of its
history: shortage of clean water, malnourishment, terrorism and racism,
ethnic strife, economic hardship, poor health care. And because of their
loyalty to Christ, believers in many nations face even greater difficulties.
More believers worldwide face persecution of various kinds today than at
any other time in history. Yet while such challenges are not trivial but
severe, the sure hope of Christ’s return goes deeper still.
The benediction in 1 Thessalonians 3 brings together both the present call
to love and the glorious hope of the future:
Now may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus, direct
our way to you, and may the Lord make you increase and abound in
love for one another and for all, as we do for you, so that he may
establish your hearts blameless in holiness before our God and Father,
at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints. (1 Thess. 3:11–13)
Greeting