DANIEL 3 [†]King Nebuchadnezzar made an image of gold, whose height
was sixty cubits [1] and its breadth six cubits. He set it up on u the plain of
Dura, in v the province of Babylon. 2[†]Then King Nebuchadnezzar sent to
gather w the satraps, the prefects, and x the governors, the counselors, the
treasurers, the justices, the magistrates, and all the officials of the provinces
to come to the dedication of the image that King Nebuchadnezzar had set
up. 3[†]Then w the satraps, the prefects, and the governors, the counselors,
the treasurers, the justices, the magistrates, and all the officials of the
provinces gathered for the dedication of the image that King
Nebuchadnezzar had set up. And they stood before the image that
Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 4And the herald y proclaimed aloud, “You are
commanded, O z peoples, nations, and languages, 5that when you hear the
a sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of
music, you b are to fall down and worship the golden image that King
Nebuchadnezzar has set up. 6And whoever does not fall down and worship
shall immediately c be cast into a burning fiery furnace.” 7Therefore, as
soon as all the peoples heard the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp,
bagpipe, and every kind of music, all z the peoples, nations, and languages
fell down and worshiped the golden image that King Nebuchadnezzar had
set up.
The Fiery Furnace
8Therefore at that time certain d Chaldeans e came forward and maliciously
accused the Jews. 9They declared [2] to King Nebuchadnezzar, “O king, live
forever! 10You, O king, f have made a decree, that every man who g hears
the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of
music, g shall fall down and worship the golden image. 11And whoever does
not fall down and worship c shall be cast into a burning fiery furnace.
12[†]There are certain Jews whom you have h appointed over the affairs of
v the province of Babylon: i Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. These men,
O king, j pay no attention to you; they do not serve your gods or worship
the golden image that you have set up.”
13Then Nebuchadnezzar k in furious rage commanded that i Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego be brought. So they brought these men before the
king. 14Nebuchadnezzar answered and said to them, “Is it true, O Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, that you do not serve my gods or worship the
golden image that I have set up? 15Now if you are ready when l you hear
the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of
music, to fall down and worship the image that I have made, well and
good. [3] But if you do not worship, c you shall immediately be cast into a
burning fiery furnace. And m who is the god who will deliver you out of my
hands?”
16
i Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the king, “O
Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter.
17If this be
so, n our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of your hand, O king. [4] 18[†]But if not,
be it known to you, O king, that we will not serve your gods or worship the
golden image that you have set up.”
19[†]Then Nebuchadnezzar was o filled with fury, and the expression of
his face p was changed against i Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He
ordered the furnace heated seven times more than it was usually heated.
20And he ordered some of the mighty men of his army q to bind i Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.
21Then these men were q bound in their cloaks, their tunics, [5] their hats,
and their other garments, and they were thrown into the burning fiery
furnace. 22[†]Because the king’s order was r urgent and the furnace
overheated, the flame of the fire killed those men who took up s Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego. 23And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, fell q bound into the burning fiery furnace.
24[†]Then King Nebuchadnezzar was t astonished and rose up u in haste.
He declared to his v counselors, “Did we not cast three men w bound into
the fire?” They answered and said to the king, “True, O king.” 25He
answered and said, “But I see four men unbound, x walking in the midst of
the fire, and they y are not hurt; and the appearance of the fourth is like z a
son of the gods.”
26Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the door of the burning fiery
furnace; he declared, s “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the
a Most High God, come out, and come here!” Then s Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego came out from the fire. 27[†]And the b satraps, the prefects,
the governors, and v the king’s counselors gathered together and saw that
c the fire had not had any power over the bodies of those men. The hair of
their heads was not singed, their d cloaks were not harmed, and no smell of
fire had come upon them. 28[†]Nebuchadnezzar answered and said,
“Blessed be the God of s Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who e has sent
his angel and f delivered his servants, who g trusted in him, and set aside [6]
the king’s command, and yielded up their bodies rather than h serve and
worship any god except their own God. 29Therefore i I make a decree: Any
j people, nation, or language that speaks anything against the God of
s Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego k shall be torn limb from limb, and
their houses laid in ruins, for there is no other god who is able to rescue in
this way.” 30[†]Then the king promoted s Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego in l the province of Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar Praises God