DANIEL 12 [†]“At that time shall arise a Michael, the great prince who has
charge of your people. And b there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
has been since there was a nation till that time. But at that time your people
shall be delivered, c everyone whose name shall be found written in the
book. 2And many of those who d sleep in e the dust of the earth shall
e awake, f some to everlasting life, and f some to shame and everlasting
contempt. 3 g And those who are wise h shall shine like the brightness of the
sky above; [1] and i those who turn many to righteousness, like the stars
forever and ever.
4But you, Daniel, j shut up the words and k seal the book,
until l the time of the end. m Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall
increase.”
5[†]Then I, Daniel, looked, and behold, two others stood, one on n this
bank of the stream and one on that bank of the stream. 6And someone said
to o the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the stream, [2]
p “How long shall it be till the end of these wonders?” 7And I heard o the
man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the stream; q he raised
his right hand and his left hand toward heaven and r swore by him who
lives forever that it would be for a s time, times, and half a time, and that
when the shattering of t the power of t the holy people comes to an end all
these things would be finished. 8I heard, u but I did not understand. Then I
said, “O my lord, what shall be the outcome of these things?” 9He said,
v “Go your way, Daniel, w for the words are shut up and sealed until the
time of the end. 10[†] x Many shall purify themselves and make themselves
white and be refined, but y the wicked shall act wickedly. And none of the
wicked shall understand, g but those who are wise shall understand.
11[†]And from the time that z the regular burnt offering is taken away and
a the abomination that makes desolate is set up, there shall be 1,290 days.
12[†] b Blessed is he who waits and arrives at the 1,335 days. 13 c But go your
way till the end. d And you shall rest and shall stand in your allotted place
at e the end of the days.”
Study Notes for Daniel
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:1–6:28 Daniel and the Three Friends at the Babylonian
Court. The Hebrew exiles live faithfully to the Lord while serving in the
court of Nebuchadnezzar and his successors, from 605 B.C. to the fall of
Babylon (539) and into the early years of Persian rule. Their service brings
blessing to the Gentiles.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:1–21 Daniel describes how he and his three friends were
taken into exile (vv. 1–7), remained undefiled (vv. 8–16), and were promoted
and preserved (vv. 17–21).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:1–2 In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim . . . ,
Nebuchad­ nezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem. Nebuchadnezzar took
Daniel and other promising young people to Babylon to be trained in
Babylonian culture and literature. This deportation was the beginning of what
came to be known as the Babylonian exile. This exile was the result of the
people’s sin (Lev. 26:33, 39). Nebuchadnezzar was the Babylonian king c.
605–562 B.C. See 2 Kings 24:1–25:26; Jer. 39:1–18; 52:1–30.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:3–4 Some of the royal family and nobility were also
exiled. Their exile fulfilled Isaiah’s prophecy to King Hezekiah in 2 Kings 20
and Isaiah 39, a century earlier. Hezekiah had shown the representatives of
Babylon around his treasuries, hoping to win a political partner against the
Assyrians. Because he had thus failed to trust in the Lord, it was prophesied
that the treasures he had shown the Babylonians, as well as some of his own
descendants, would be carried off to Babylon.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:5–7 Nebuchadnezzar forced the exiles into adopting
Babylonian culture by depriving them of their religious and cultural identity
and creating dependence on the royal court. They were given names linked
with Babylonian deities in place of Israelite names linked with their God.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:8–16 Daniel and his three friends kept their original names
and resolved not to defile themselves with the king’s food and drink (v. 8).
They avoided the rich diet as a way of protecting themselves from being
tempted by Babylonian culture. Their restricted diet continually reminded them
that they were the people of God in a foreign land. They were dependent for
their food, indeed for their very lives, upon God, not King Nebuchadnezzar.
The Lord gave Daniel favor with his captors (v. 9), and the steward honored
their request for a special diet. At the end of a trial period, Daniel and his
friends looked fitter than those who had consumed a high-calorie diet.
FACT
What’s in a name? Changing a person’s name (1:7) was a sign of having
power over that person. Conquering rulers often did this to their captives as a
means of making them more a part of their new culture.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:17–21 God also gave Daniel and his friends exceptional
knowledge of Babylonian literature and wisdom. In addition, he gave Daniel
the ability to understand all visions and dreams. God’s favor enabled Daniel
and his friends to answer all of Nebuchadnezzar’s questions, so that he found
them ten times better than all of his pagan advisers.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 1:21 until the first year of King Cyrus. That is, 539 B.C.,
when Cyrus conquered Babylon. God provided for Daniel throughout 70 years
of exile.
DANIEL
Daniel was a young man from a noble family who was deported from Judah
to Babylon by King Nebuchadnezzar (605 B.C.). The Babylonians trained
Daniel for three years in their language and culture. The Lord blessed Daniel
with exceptional wisdom in these areas. He also gave Daniel the ability to
interpret dreams. When Daniel interpreted a dream for Nebuchadnezzar, the
grateful king gave him an important position in the royal court. After the fall
of the Babylonian Empire, Daniel served in a similar role in the Medo-
Persian Empire that succeeded it (6:28). Daniel was a faithful servant of the
Lord who consistently refused to disobey God. At the same time, he
remained respectful to those in authority over him. Daniel, along with his
friends Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, did precisely what God had
commanded the exiles to do in Jeremiah 29:7: they were a blessing to their
captors while at the same time remaining true to their Lord amid
extraordinary pressures. (Daniel 1:17–21)
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:1–49 Nebuchadnezzar expects his own interpreters to tell
him the content of his dream, perhaps to prove that they are genuinely qualified
to interpret it (vv. 1–16). Daniel’s God shows himself superior by revealing to
Daniel both the content and the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream (vv.
17–49).
FACT
The dreams of a king (2:1) had significance for his nation as a whole
because dreams were thought to be the shadows of future events. If the
dreams of a king could be correctly interpreted, then the appropriate actions
could be taken to preserve the kingdom.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:1 In the ancient world, dreams were thought to give an
indication of future events. A king’s dreams had significance for the nation as a
whole. The interpretation was important so that the king might prepare for or
try to prevent the events the dream foretold.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:2 Nebuchadnezzar had a staff specializing in dream
interpretation: the magicians, the enchanters, the sorcerers, and the
Chaldeans. “Chaldeans” initially referred to a part of the Babylonian Empire.
It developed into a descriptive term for a special group, known for their
knowledge about magic and interpreting dreams.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:4 From this point until the end of ch. 7, the text switches
from Hebrew to Aramaic, the official language of the Babylonian royal court.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:5–6 Contrary to normal procedure, the king demanded that
his interpreters recount the dream itself as well as its interpretation. If the
interpreters succeeded, they would be given great rewards. If they failed, they
would be executed and their houses would be destroyed.
The City of Babylon
The city of Babylon reached its zenith under Nebuchadrezzar II (Nebuchadnezzar of Scripture, who
reigned 605–562 B.C.). He restored and enlarged it, making it the largest city seen in the world up to that
time. The Euphrates River flowed through it, with the oldest quarter of the city lying on the east bank of
the river. The city was surrounded by a city wall with fortified gates that were named after the various
Babylonian deities. The Esagila Complex on the east bank of the Euphrates contained the Temple of
Marduk with its associated seven-storied ziggurat Etemenanki.
From Esagila, the Processional Way (its walls lined with glazed bricks with representations of lions) led
to the Ishtar Gate (which was decorated with glazed brick reliefs of dragons and young bulls). Beside the
Ishtar Gate stood two immense fortified palaces. A bridge led over the Euphrates to the western part of
the city. No evidence of the famed Hanging Gardens of Babylon has been found, but if anything like this
was ever constructed here, it would have been during this time, at the height of the city’ s splendor. The
city was captured by Cyrus the Persian in 539 B.C.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:11 These men consider the king’s demand unreasonable.
No human being could know another person’s dream unless it was revealed by
the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh. Their own words reveal the power
of Israel’s God, who does exactly what they say is impossible.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:14–24 Daniel leads his friends in praying to the true God
for insight.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:15–16 Daniel requested from Arioch an appointment with
the king to reveal the dream and its interpretation. This shows Daniel’s faith
because he did this even before God had revealed the dream to him.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:23 When God answered Daniel’s prayer, he praised and
thanked God for his wisdom and might.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:25–28 Arioch was eager to claim the credit for finding an
interpreter for the king’s dream. Daniel, however, was careful to credit God
with revealing the mystery. Daniel was able to interpret it because there is a
God in heaven who reveals mysteries.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:30 God made known the interpretation of the dream so
that Nebuchadnezzar would know this great God controlled future events, and
so that he would be aware of what was coming.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:37–38 According to Daniel’s interpretation, the head of
gold was Nebuchadnezzar. God gave him great authority, power, and glory.
Babylon itself was an amazing achievement, with its hanging gardens (one of
the famed Seven Wonders of the ancient world), many temples, and a bridge
crossing the Euphrates River. Thus the head of gold is a fitting description.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:39 After Nebuchadnezzar’s time there will be two more
kingdoms (Medo-Persia [539–331 B.C.] and Greece [331–63 B.C.]). Each will be
inferior to the previous one, though still strong and powerful.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:40 The fourth kingdom (the Roman Empire) will be
strong as iron, yet also unstable.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:43–44 God will establish a kingdom that shall never be
destroyed, his final kingdom, which will ultimately destroy all other
kingdoms. Though it starts small, it will grow to fill the earth and endure
forever. The stone that will break in pieces all these other four kingdoms is
most likely Christ.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 2:46–49 Nebuchadnezzar recognized and honored Daniel’s
God. He also promoted Daniel and his friends within the Babylonian court,
giving them further opportunity to bring peace and welfare to the city where
the Lord had exiled them, as Jeremiah had counseled (Jer. 29:1–14).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:1–30 Nebuchadnezzar commands all peoples under his
rule to worship a golden image. Daniel’s friends refuse, out of loyalty to their
God. When God delivers them from the fiery furnace, Nebuchadnezzar’s
respect for their God increases.
FACT
Daniel’s languages. The book of Daniel was written in both Hebrew (1:1–
2:3; 7:1–12:13) and Aramaic (2:4–7:28). In OT times, Aramaic was the
language used by several people groups in the Middle East (see 2 Kings
18:26).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:1 The image of gold reflects the statue in
Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, except it is made entirely of gold. It is as if
Nebuchadnezzar were asserting that there would be no other kingdoms after
his. It was sixty cubits (90 feet/27 m) high and six cubits (9 feet/2.7 m) wide.
Its location on a plain in Babylon recalls the Tower of Babel (Gen. 11:1–9), as
does its purpose to provide a unifying center for all people.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:2 satraps. A governor of a satrapy (province).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:3 Chapter 3 repeatedly states that this was the image that
King Nebuchadnezzar had set up. It is unclear whether the image represented
Nebuchadnezzar or one of his gods. All of the leading officials from
throughout his empire were gathered before the statue for its dedication. The
unity of Nebuchadnezzar’s empire was based on worship of the golden image.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:12 Certain “Chaldeans” (see note on 2:2) observed that
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego had not bowed to the statue. They
charged the young men with ingratitude for the positions they held and
disbelief in Nebuchadnezzar’s gods.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:18 But if not. There is no doubt in the three men’s minds
that God has the power to save them. They also realize that God may choose
not to save them.
SHADRACH, MESHACH, AND ABEDNEGO
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were Jewish exiles and friends of Daniel
in Babylon. As he did for Daniel, God gave them a remarkable
understanding of Babylonian literature and culture. They, too, were given
positions of great leadership in Babylon. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
were always faithful to God and trusted him entirely. While they showed
deep respect for King Nebuchadnezzar, they were unwilling to follow any
orders that would mean compromising their faith. When commanded to
worship a golden image, they refused to do so, even though it meant being
cast into a fiery furnace. The three men assured Nebuchadnezzar that their
God was able to save them from the furnace, but that even if he chose not to
save them, they would still not deny him. (Daniel 3:16–18)
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:19 In anger, Nebuchadnezzar orders the furnace
superheated. Seven times more than it was usually heated is probably a
figurative expression meaning “as hot as possible.”
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:22 Nebuchadnezzar’s order resulted in the death of his
own soldiers. The Lord is able to protect his servants better than
Nebuchadnezzar can protect his.
The Traditional View of Daniel’ s Visions
Medo–Persian
Empire (539–331
B.C.)
chest and arms of
silver (vv. 32, 39)
Greek Empire (331–63 B.C.) middle and thighs of bronze (vv.
32, 39)
Vision of
Statue (ch.
2)
Vision of
Tree (ch. 4)
Vision of
Four Beasts
(ch. 7)
Vision of
Ram and
Goat (ch. 8)
Babylonian Empire
(625–539 B.C.)
head of gold (vv. 36–
38)
Nebuchadnezzar
humbled (vv. 19–37)
lion with wings of
eagle (v. 4)
Roman Empire
(63 B.C.
–A.D. 476) Future Events
legs of iron; feet of
messianic kingdom:
iron and clay (vv.
the stone (vv. 44–45)
33, 40–43)
bear raised up on
one side (v. 5)
ram with two horns:
one longer than the
other (vv. 2–4)
leopard with four wings and four
heads (v. 6)
male goat with one horn: it was
broken and four horns came up
(vv. 5–8); Antiochus IV (vv. 23–
26)
terrifying beast
with iron teeth (v.
7)
Antichrist: little horn
uttering great boasts
(vv. 8–11)
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:24–25 Daniel’s friends were joined in the fire by a fourth
individual, who had the appearance of a divine being like a son of the gods.
This was either a physical appearance of Christ before his incarnation or an
angel. Either way, this is a demonstration of God’s presence with believers in
distress.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:27 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were completely
un­­ touched by the fire. Their clothes were not harmed nor their hair singed,
and they did not even smell of fire—a testimony to the Lord’s protection.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:28 Nebuchadnezzar’s question in v. 15 had been decisively
answered, as he is forced to testify. Yet his heart is not yet changed: the God of
whom he spoke was still the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, or
their . . . God, not his own.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 3:30 Nebuchadnezzar shows that he appreciates the integrity
of these men.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:1–37 Nebuchadnezzar has another dream, and Daniel
again is the only one of his officials able to interpret it. This dream concerns
Nebuchadnezzar’s own need to acknowledge that the God of Israel is the true
God. Through humiliation, Nebuchadnezzar learns that lesson.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:1–3 The narrative begins at the end of the story, with the
letter of praise to God that Nebuchadnezzar wrote after his recovery. From
being a persecutor of the faithful, Nebuchadnezzar has become a witness to the
faith.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:7 This time Nebuchadnezzar tells the wise men of Babylon
the dream.
FACT
A tree represents King Nebuchadnezzar in his dream (4:5–27). Trees can
symbolize great kingdoms in the Bible. Ezekiel 31:2–9 compares Assyria to
a cedar that shelters the nations. Jesus uses a tree to describe God’s kingdom
(Mark 4:32).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:10–16 In this dream, Nebuchadnezzar saw an enormous
tree whose top touched the heavens. While Nebuchadnezzar was looking on,
however, a watcher, a holy one, came down and ordered that the tree be cut
down. The tree was not completely destroyed, however. Its stump would
remain in the ground for seven periods of time. “Seven” signifies completion.
Most scholars, however, believe that this refers to seven years.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:22 In his interpretation, Daniel identified the enormous
tree as Nebuchadnezzar: it is you, O king.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:23 The image of the tree reaching to the heavens is a
reminder of the Tower of Babel (Gen. 11:1–9). Such pride ends in disaster.
Nebuchadnezzar, who thought of himself in godlike terms, would become
beastlike so that he could learn that he is merely human. When the tree was cut
down, the stump and the roots were allowed to remain, bound in iron and
bronze, possibly suggesting that Nebuchadnezzar’s kingdom will be protected
and then established more firmly after he learned to honor the true God.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:25 Nebuchadnezzar will experience a full period of
judgment, seven periods of time, in this animal-like state. When
Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged that God the Most High rules the kingdom of
men and gives it to whom he will, Nebuchadnezzar’s kingdom will be
restored to him.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:27 Therefore, O king . . . break off your sins by
practicing righteousness, and . . . showing mercy to the oppressed. This
appeal for repentance implied that the outcome shown to Nebuchadnezzar in
the dream could be changed. If Nebuchadnezzar would humble himself, God
would not need to humble him further.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:28–33 A year went by, but Nebuchadnezzar was
unchanged. The view from the roof of the royal palace of Babylon included
numerous ornate temples, the hanging gardens, and the outer wall of the city.
As he looked at these accomplishments, Nebuchadnezzar boasted to himself of
his mighty power and glory. Immediately, the sentence of judgment was
announced from heaven. His royal authority was taken from him, and he was
driven away from Babylon. He ate grass and lived wild in the open air like the
beasts of the field, growing his hair and nails long.
FACT
The city of Babylon had some of the most impressive buildings of the
ancient Near East. It was home to the famous Hanging Gardens, which was
one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world. Its outer walls were wide
enough for chariots driven by four horses to pass each other.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 4:34–37 At the end of God’s appointed time of judgment,
Nebuchadnezzar raised his eyes to heaven and his reason was restored. Once
brought low by God, he was restored to control of his kingdom. He blessed the
Most High, and praised and honored him who lives forever.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:1–31 Daniel explains to Belshazzar, the last king of
Babylon, that the writing on the wall is a message that the true God rules over
all. In his own time, this true God will vindicate his name against those who
defile it, no matter how powerful they are.
NEBUCHADNEZZAR
Nebuchadnezzar was the powerful King of Babylon who destroyed
Jerusalem and deported a number of the city’s inhabitants to his own land.
When the king had a dream that only Daniel could interpret, he
acknowledged the power of Daniel’s God. The mighty king had to be
brought very low, however, before he turned to the Lord. After failing to
heed a warning from God, Nebuchadnezzar was forced to live in the
wilderness, where he ate grass and lived like an animal. At the end of God’s
appointed time of judgment, however, Nebuchadnezzar turned to the Lord
and he regained his sanity. God restored his kingdom to him, demonstrating
that the Lord is able to humble the proud and exalt the humble. The great
and mighty persecutor of Israel, the destroyer of Jerusalem, was humbled by
God’s grace and brought to confess God’s mercy. (Daniel 4:28–37)
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:1–4 Belshazzar was a co-regent of Babylon c. 553–539
B.C. At the center of Belshazzar’s great feast were the vessels of gold and of
silver that had been taken from the Jerusalem temple by Nebuchadnezzar.
Nebuchadnezzar was not literally the father of Belshazzar; Belshazzar was the
son of Nabonidus, with whom he shared co-regency during the closing years of
the Babylonian monarchy. The word “father” in Aramaic, like Hebrew, can
mean “ancestor” or “predecessor” (v. 2, esv footnote). Belshazzar wanted to
emphasize his direct connection to Nebuchadnezzar, who had been the greatest
of all Babylonian kings.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:5–9 The fingers of a mysterious hand wrote on the
plaster of the palace wall opposite the lampstand, where its message could
be clearly seen. The king’s response was terror: literally, the “joints of his loins
were loosened.” None of the Babylonian magicians were able to interpret the
writing. Anyone who interpreted the writing would be clothed with purple, an
expensive color in the ancient world, and would wear a chain of gold, a mark
of high rank. He would also be the third ruler in the kingdom, which may
refer to being next highest to King Nabonidus and the co-regent Belshazzar.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:10–12 The queen most likely refers to the queen mother.
She reminded Belshazzar of Daniel, whose ability to solve problems had been
repeatedly demonstrated during the reign of Nebuchadnezzar. Nebuchadnezzar
had appointed him chief of his wise men, because the spirit of the holy gods
enabled him to answer difficult questions.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:13–31 Daniel alone is able to decipher the writing on the
wall. It is a message from the true God, telling of the end of the Babylonian
Empire.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:18 Daniel contrasted Belshazzar with Nebuchadnezzar, to
whom the Most High God gave . . . kingship and greatness and glory and
majesty. Nebuchadnezzar was given godlike powers to kill and keep alive, to
raise up and to humble. Yet when he became proud, God humbled him until he
confessed the power of God.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:23 Belshazzar knew of Nebuchadnezzar’s humbling, yet
he lifted himself up . . . against the Lord of heaven by using the sacred
vessels from the Jerusalem temple for an idolatrous feast.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:25 Daniel interpreted the writing . . . Mene, Mene, Tekel,
and Parsin. The words are clearly Aramaic. They describe a sequence of
weights, decreasing from a mina to a shekel to a half-shekel. Read as verbs, the
sequence becomes: “Numbered, numbered, weighed, and divided.” The Lord
had numbered the days of Belshazzar’s kingdom and brought it to an end
because he had been judged and found lacking.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:28 As a result of God’s judgment, Belshazzar’s kingdom
will be divided and given to the Medes and the Persians.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 5:30–31 Belshazzar gave Daniel the promised reward, but it
was an empty gift. That very night Belshazzar’s rule ended, when the Medes
and the Persians entered Babylon. Belshazzar was killed and replaced as king
by Darius the Mede. The identity of Darius the Mede and the exact nature of
his relationship to Cyrus are not certain. Cyrus was already king of Persia at
the time when Babylon fell to the Persians (539 B.C.).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:1–28 The events of ch. 6 recall the events of ch. 3.
However, while ch. 3 took place in the Babylonian royal court, ch. 6 takes
place in the court of the Medo-Persians who had conquered Babylon. Daniel
refuses to treat King Darius as the gods’ chief representative. When God
delivers Daniel from the lions, Darius learns to respect Daniel’s God.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:1–3 satraps. See note on 3:2. The three high officials
oversaw the satraps’ work. As one of these three, Daniel received the reward
promised by Belshazzar. Daniel did such an excellent job in this role that
Darius planned to set him over the whole kingdom.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:4–15 The other officials in the Medo-Persian court are
jealous of Daniel’s success. They conspire to get the king to issue an edict that
Daniel cannot obey.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:6–7 Darius likely viewed this law as a way to unite the
kingdom by identifying himself as the sole mediator between the people and
the gods.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:8 the law of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot
be revoked. This does not mean that Medo-Persian kings never changed their
mind, but to do so would be an embarrassment.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:10 Daniel continued his practice of prostrating himself
three times daily toward Jerusalem. This must have made it easy for his
enemies to gather the evidence necessary to convict him.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:16–18 The mouth of the den was covered with a stone,
which was then sealed with the signet rings of the king and his lords.
Humanly speaking, Daniel was left all alone. Yet Darius’s last words to Daniel
pointed to a higher source of help: “May your God, whom you serve
continually, deliver you!”
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:19–23 At break of day, Darius hurried to the lions’ den.
He discovered that Daniel had spent a comfortable night even though
surrounded by wild animals, while Darius himself had been unable to sleep (v.
18) though surrounded by royal luxury. Because Daniel trusted in his God and
was found blameless before him, God sent his angel and shut the mouths of
the lions so that they were unable to hurt him.
FACT
Lions’ dens (6:17) were built to house captured lions, which would be later
released and hunted for sport. Ancient writings other than the Bible also
include stories of people being placed in cages with predatory animals.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:24 After Daniel’s release, those who had schemed against
him were thrown to the same lions. Anyone who made a false accusation
would be punished by receiving the same fate they had sought for their victim.
The sentence was also carried out on the families of the guilty men: their
children, and their wives.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:25–27 Darius, like Nebuchadnezzar, confesses the
awesome power and protection of Daniel’s God: he is the living God . . . his
kingdom shall never be destroyed.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 6:28 This closing comment reminds the reader that most of
Daniel’s life was spent in exile. Yet God protected him right up to the time of
King Cyrus, when Daniel’s prayers for Jerusalem finally began to be answered.
Cyrus was God’s chosen instrument to return the Jews from exile. He issued a
decree that they could return to their homeland and rebuild Jerusalem.
7:1–12:13 The Visions of Daniel. These chapters describe Daniel’s apocalyptic
visions, which reassure God’s people that, in spite of exile and persecution,
God is still in control of history and will make sure that his purposes are
fulfilled.
FACT
Opening the books. Scribes recorded the daily events and activities of royal
courts. These writings served as records for the archives and also could
provide testimony for court hearings. Daniel’s first readers would have
understood quite well his vision of God opening the books (7:10).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:1–28 In the first vision, four beasts represent four mighty
kings (or kingdoms); nevertheless, God’s plan to exalt his faithful will be
victorious.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:1–2 Daniel received the vision during the first year of
Belshazzar (c. 552 B.C.). He saw that four winds of heaven were stirring up
the great sea, a symbol for chaos and potential rebellion against God.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:3 This sea produced four startling creatures, one after the
other, each more frightening than the preceding one. These creatures are
identified in v. 17.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:4 The first beast was like a lion with eagles’ wings; it had
the strength and majesty of a lion combined with the speed and power of an
eagle. This beast had his wings plucked off and was transformed into a man,
recalling the humbling and restoration of Nebuchadnezzar. Most scholars think
the lion represents Babylon.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:5 The second beast was like a bear, raised up on one
side. Many scholars think this suggests the unequal power of the two countries
combined in the Medo-Persian Empire. It had a mouth full of the ribs of its
previous victim(s); these may have been the people Cyrus conquered to unify
his nation. However, the beast was told to arise and devour even more. The
three ribs could also represent the three countries that Medo-Persia conquered
(Babylon, 539 B.C.; Lydia, 546; and Egypt, 525).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:6 The third beast was like another composite animal, part
leopard, part bird, with four wings and four heads. It combined ferocity and
speed with the ability to see in all four directions at once. But the four wings
emphasize even more the element of speed. Many scholars believe this
corresponds well to Alexander the Great’s conquest of the known world by age
32. After his death in 323 B.C., his empire was divided among four of his
generals. These four rulers are symbolized by the four heads.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:7 The fourth beast cannot be described in terms of earthly
animals. It was terrifying and dreadful, exceedingly strong, with great iron
teeth that devoured and crushed, and it trampled down whatever it did not eat.
Its head had ten horns, symbolizing increased strength. This final, terrifying
beast most likely represents the Roman Empire.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:8 Even more surprisingly, another small horn came up
among the horns, uprooting three of the 10 others. This horn had eyes and a
mouth that spoke arrogantly. The 10 horns likely signify 10 rulers or
kingdoms. The little horn was significantly different than the others, for it had
teeth of iron, claws of bronze, and eyes like the eyes of a man. It started
“little” but grew up to overpower three of the other horns. Some scholars
understand this horn to refer to Antiochus IV Epiphanes, but many have
understood it to refer to the Antichrist.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:9–12 At the center of Daniel’s vision was the heavenly
courtroom, with thrones set up for judgment. The Ancient of Days, God
himself, sat on the central throne. His clothing was white as snow,
representing purity. His hair was as white as pure wool, symbolizing the
wisdom that comes with great age. His chariot-throne was flaming with fire,
images of the divine warrior’s power to destroy his enemies. A stream of fire
flowed out from before him, and angelic attendants surrounded him.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:10 Ten thousand times ten thousand is an uncountable
multitude, representing not one kingdom but all the kingdoms of the earth
standing before God. The books that were opened represent God’s records of
the deeds of those on the earth.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:11–12 As Daniel kept watching, the boastful little horn
was finally silenced: the beast was killed, and its body destroyed and given
over to be burned with fire. Daniel looked back at the other beasts and their
dominion was taken away, but they were not destroyed like this last beast.
Their kingdoms remained for a time set by God and then were incorporated
into the following kingdom.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:13–14 The one like a son of man combines human and
divine traits in one person. This son of man seems also to be greater than any
mere human, for to come on the clouds is a clear symbol of divine authority.
This son of man is given dominion and glory and a kingdom. He will rule
over the entire world forever. Thus, he must be much more than a personified
representative of Israel, and certainly more than a mere angel, for no created
being would have the right to rule the entire world forever. Jesus refers to
himself as “son of man” more than any other title, and this role is ultimately
fulfilled in Rev. 19:11–16 when Jesus comes at the end of the age to judge and
rule the nations. At the end of Jesus’ earthly ministry, when he claimed to be
this heavenly “son of man,” his opponents said he had committed blasphemy
because he was claiming God’s power as his own.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:15–27 Daniel’s vision returns to the four beasts (vv. 1–8).
As for the “little” horn from the fourth beast (vv. 7–8), who made war with
the saints and prevailed over them (v. 21) and who shall wear out the saints
(v. 25), many take this to represent the Antichrist, whom they expect in the end
times. Other interpreters think there is not enough precise data to identify the
little horn. It is clear, however, that this king will blaspheme against God,
oppress the saints, and try to abolish the calendar and the law, which govern
how God’s people worship. The saints will be handed over into his power for a
time, times, and half a time (v. 25)—totaling three and a half times, or half of
a total period of seven times of judgment. The angel’s primary concern is the
judgment to come and the triumph of the saints, rather than the identity of the
little horn. The central point of the vision is that God limits the time when the
beastly kingdoms of the earth will oppress the saints. In the heavenly court, the
beasts will finally be destroyed.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 7:28 Daniel is stunned by the vision revealed in this chapter;
he has only enough strength to think about it.
The Empires of Daniel’ s Visions: The Persians
c. 538–331 B.C.
After Cyrus the Great united the Median and Persian empires, he overthrew the Babylonians and
established the greatest power the world had ever known. Under later rulers the Persian Empire
eventually extended from Egypt and Thrace to the borders of India, and Cyrus himself declared, “the
LORD, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth” (2 Chron. 36:23; Ezra 1:2).
Consistent with his regular policies to promote loyalty among his subjugated peoples, Cyrus immediately
released the exiled Jews from their captivity in Babylon and even sponsored the rebuilding of the temple.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:1–27 In this next vision, Daniel sees what is to come of the
Medo-Persian Empire, Alexander the Great’s empire, and the Hellenistic
empires that succeed it. The upheavals to come will mean terrible times for
God’s people, but they must endure, knowing that God rules over all.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:3 In this vision, Daniel saw an all-powerful ram with two
horns, one of which was longer than the other. The ram represents the Medo-
Persian Empire, with the higher horn representing the stronger, Persian part.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:5 a male goat came from the west. Alexander the Great
came from Greece, which was to the “west” of both Babylon and Persia.
without touching the ground. Alexander conquered the mighty Persian
Empire with amazing speed.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:7 he was enraged. Alexander’s father was king of
Macedonia and brought all of Greece under his control by 336 B.C. Alexander
was only 20 when his father was murdered, but he consolidated his hold on
Greece and unified the Greeks.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:8 the goat became exceedingly great. Alexander the
Great’s kingdom extended all the way to India, exceeding any kingdom before
it in size. there came up four conspicuous horns. After the death of
Alexander the Great in 323 B.C., four of his generals divided his kingdom into
four parts.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:9–10 A little horn grows out of one of the four horns and
expands his realm. Most scholars identify this little horn as Antiochus IV
Epiphanes (ruled 175–164 B.C.). Antiochus IV tried to unify his kingdom by
forcing his subjects to adopt Greek cultural and religious practices. He banned
circumcision, ended sacrifice at the temple in Jerusalem, and deliberately
defiled the temple by sacrificing a pig on the altar and placing a pagan religious
object in the Most Holy Place. This horn grew great, even to the host of
heaven, and some of the stars it threw down to the ground. This probably
refers to the faithful who were killed during Antiochus IV’s reign.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:11 The Prince of the host probably refers to God, because
of the similar expression “Prince of princes” in v. 25. the place of his
sanctuary was overthrown. When the Jews refused to adopt Antiochus IV’s
pagan religion, he punished them severely.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:12–14 Because of renewed transgression on the part of
God’s people, the saints and the temple sacrifices were handed over to
Antiochus IV , but only for a limited period: 2,300 evenings and mornings, or
a little over six years. In the end, the little horn will be judged and the
sanctuary restored to its rightful state. Unlike the less precise “time, times,
and half a time” of 7:25, this period is measured in days, suggesting that God
has a precise calendar for the times of his people’s suffering.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:15–26 The angel Gabriel explains to Daniel that the vision
concerns the future of the region, which God rules for his purposes. The vision
is given to prepare God’s people for the coming events, even the severe
persecutions under Antiochus IV Epiphanes.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:20–22 Unlike the vision of ch. 7, the vision of 8:3–14 is
precisely interpreted by the angel. The two-horned ram represents the kings of
Media and Persia, of whom Cyrus, king of Persia, became the dominant
partner. The goat was the king of Greece, Alexander the Great. See note on v.
8.
FACT
Gabriel is the first angel mentioned by name in the Bible (8:16; 9:21).
Michael, the only other angel named in Scripture, also appears in Daniel
(10:13, 21; 12:1). In the NT, Gabriel was the angel who announced the births
of John the Baptist and Jesus (Luke 1:19, 26). Michael appears again in Rev.
12:7.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:23 The “little horn” of v. 9 corresponds to a king of bold
face, who was completely wicked. This describes Antiochus IV Epiphanes
(reigned 175–164 B.C.). See note on vv. 9–10.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:25 he shall even rise up against the Prince of princes.
This title refers to God. Antiochus IV rebels against even God’s legitimate
sovereignty, as he shows by desecrating the temple (see note on 11:31–32).
The Empires of Daniel’ s Visions: The Greeks
c. 335–303 B.C.
The ascension of Alexander the Great to the throne of the Macedonian kingdom (in northern Greece)
spelled the end for the mighty Persian Empire. After gaining the loyalty of the other city-states of Greece,
Alexander’ s astounding military prowess and success enabled him to systematically overtake virtually all
of Persia’ s former territory within 12 years. Soon after he died in Babylon at age 33 (323 B.C.),
Alexander’
s conquered territory was divided among his generals, who constantly vied for power among
each other until their territories resembled those shown here (c. 303).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 8:27 Even though Daniel did not fully understand the
vision, he was nonetheless overcome and appalled, for he recognized the
severity of the suffering coming on his own people. Like the other prophets, he
sympathized with his people when they faced the judgment of God. Yet in spite
of his deep concern for the future, he went about the king’s business.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:1–27 While reading the book of Jeremiah and realizing
that the “seventy years” (v. 2) are almost over (see Jer. 29:10), Daniel turns to
God in prayer, seeking mercy for Jerusalem. The angel Gabriel appears to him
(Dan. 9:21) and explains that another period of 70 “sevens” is at hand for
God’s people. The name Yahweh (represented by LORD, in small capital
letters), not used elsewhere in Daniel, is used seven times in this chapter,
emphasizing God’s covenantal relationship to his people. This vision occurs in
Darius’s first year (539 B.C.), about 11 years after the one in ch. 8. Daniel
appears to be over 80 years old. On the identity of Darius the Mede, see note
on 5:30–31.
FACT
Daniel’s prayer. Jeremiah prophesied that God would restore his people after
70 years in Babylon (Jer. 25:11–14; 29:10). With this in mind, Daniel prays
for Israel’s restoration (Dan. 9:1–19).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:1–19 Daniel knows why the exile came upon the Jewish
people, and he confesses his own and his people’s sins and prays for
forgiveness and mercy.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:2 Some interpreters understand the seventy years to
extend from 605 B.C. to the first return of the exiles in 538, following Cyrus’s
decree allowing the Jews to return. Others suggest that the 70 years extend
from 586 B.C., when Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem, to 515, when the
rebuilding of the temple was completed under Zerubbabel. Jeremiah 29:10–14
suggests that at the end of the 70 years Israel will pray to God and he will hear
them. This passage may suggest a time when the temple is complete and is
being used for prayer. Both interpretations are reasonable, but Daniel appears
to be suggesting the first interpretation. At the end of the 70 years Babylon will
be punished, which fits well with the events of 539 B.C.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:3 Daniel began to pray for the restoration of God’s people
to their land. Daniel also fasted and put on sackcloth and ashes.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:4 Daniel’s prayer begins with praise of God’s power and
justice. Daniel pleads with God to show grace to his people.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:11 Under the terms of the Sinai covenant, the
unfaithfulness that Daniel confesses in vv. 5–11 would result in the exile of
God’s people from the Land of Promise. Yet when his people repented of their
sins, the Lord would gather them again to the land.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:17 Daniel asked the Lord to show favor to his sanctuary
and to end the exile, thus honoring his own name.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:20–27 The angel Gabriel, first seen in ch. 8, appears to
Daniel and reveals that there is more to come. This is clear proof that Daniel’s
prayer has been heard and his request for favor has been honored by the Lord.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:24–27 There are many suggested interpretations of the
seventy weeks, but there are three main views: (1) the passage refers to events
surrounding Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175–164 B.C.); (2) the 70 sevens are to
be understood figuratively; and (3) the passage refers to events around the time
of Christ. Most scholars understand the 70 “sevens” to be made up of 70
periods of seven years, or 490 years, but they apply these years to different
periods of time. (See diagram.) In any case, the important point is that God has
appointed a certain amount of time until the end of his people’s suffering, and
thus they should not lose heart.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:24 Gabriel says Daniel’s requests for his people and city
will be answered. Cyrus fulfilled this when he allowed the Jews to return
home. Gabriel also explains when Jerusalem will be completely cleansed. The
transgression, sin, and iniquity that had led God to abandon Israel will
ultimately be atoned for. God will bring everlasting righteousness, making his
people into a holy nation. Because of their past neglect of the prophets’ words,
the Lord will seal their words as an ancient document writer might seal a letter.
God will stamp the words of the prophets as authentic expressions of his mind
through their fulfillment. To anoint a most holy place might refer to the
sanctuary in Jerusalem and its reconsecration by Judas Maccabeus in 164 B.C.
Or, it might refer to the “anointing” of the heavenly most holy place by Christ
when he died. The Lord was committed to bring in the promised new covenant
of Jer. 31:31–33.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:25–26 The promised restoration of God’s people and
sanctuary will come in three stages. The first seven periods of sevens will run
from the issuing of the decree to restore and rebuild Jerusalem to the time when
that rebuilding is complete. This period of restoration will be a time of trouble,
as will the subsequent sixty-two periods of sevens after the city had been
rebuilt. The messianic ruler will make his appearance at the end of these 69
sevens. Even the appearing of this anointed one, a prince, will not
immediately usher in the peace and righteousness that Jer. 31:31–33
anticipated. Instead, the anointed one will himself be cut off, leaving him with
nothing, surely a reference to the crucifixion of Christ. After the cutting off of
the anointed one, the people of the prince who is to come will destroy
Jerusalem and its sanctuary. Many commentators understand this “coming
prince” as a reference to the Roman general Titus, whose army destroyed
Jerusalem in A.D. 70, or as a reference to a future antichrist. Other interpreters
understand him to be the same “anointed prince” anticipated in Dan. 9:25. This
person is addressed as “anointed one,” where the focus is on his priestly work
of offering himself as a sacrifice, and as a “ruler” whose people fail to submit
to his rule. The principal cause of the destruction of the city and temple of
Jerusalem in A.D. 70 was the transgression of God’s people in rejecting the
Messiah that God had sent to them (Luke 19:41–44).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 9:27 he shall put an end to sacrifice and offering. In one
interpretation, this refers to Christ’s atonement. With the death of Jesus on the
cross, the atoning sacrifices of the OT were abolished. In another
interpretation, if “the prince who is to come” (v. 26) is not the Messiah but an
opponent of God’s people, then “he shall put an end to sacrifice and offering”
means he will destroy the temple, and thus the prediction refers to the
destruction of Jerusalem. A third interpretation argues that this will be fulfilled
at the end of the church age, during the great tribulation. The final part of v. 27
is extremely difficult to translate. Literally, it reads, “In the middle of that
seven, he will put an end to sacrifice and offering, and on account of the
extremity [or “wing”] of abominations that cause desolation, until the end that
has been decreed, it will be poured out unto desolation.” On the connection of
abominations and makes desolate, see note on 11:31–32.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:1–12:13 Conflicts on earth reflect conflicts in the
heavens, and this will continue to the end, when God will ultimately win the
battle.
The 70 Weeks of Daniel 9
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:1–11:1 A heavenly visitor tells Daniel about conflict in
heaven. He explains that he has met resistance from other spiritual powers. He
has come to tell Daniel about future events.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:1 Chapters 10–12 form a single vision, received in the
third year of Cyrus king of Persia. Two years earlier, the first party of Jewish
exiles had returned to Jerusalem, but they faced severe opposition and had
stopped their rebuilding work.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:2–3 As a sign of identification with the trials of his
brothers and sisters in Judah, Daniel was in mourning for three weeks. He
went without meat or wine and did not use the lotions that made life more
comfortable.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:5–6 Daniel received a vision of a heavenly being, dressed
in linen, with a belt of fine gold . . . around his waist. His body glowed with
inner light, like beryl, a gemstone. His face shone like lightning. His eyes
were like torches and his arms and legs like polished bronze. The sound of
his words echoed like the roar of a crowd. Yet this glorious figure was unable
to complete his task without the help of Michael (v. 13), so it is unlikely that
this is a physical manifestation of God or Christ.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:10–12 This messenger encouraged Daniel by telling him
that he was greatly loved by God. He had been sent to Daniel to give him
insight in response to his prayer about the situation in Jerusalem.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:13 The angelic messenger was delayed on his journey
twenty-one days by the prince of the kingdom of Persia, an evil angel
associated with the Persian Empire. Although this spiritual opponent was
powerful enough to delay God’s messenger for a period of three weeks, all he
could do was delay him. When Michael, one of the chief princes, came to
help him, the angel was finally able to complete his journey.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:15–16 On hearing of the power of the evil spiritual
forces, Daniel was overtaken by such a sense of weakness that he was bowed
to the ground, unable even to speak until the angel touched him on the lips.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:20 The angel declared that he would return to the fight
against the prince of Persia, and after that against the prince of Greece.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 10:21 The book of truth most likely refers to God’s plan for
Israel and the world.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:1 Mention of the first year of Darius the Mede (539
B.C.) is significant since it was the year when the decree was issued that
allowed the Jews to return to their homeland.
The Empires of Daniel’ s Visions: The Ptolemies and the Seleucids
(Early)
c. 323–198 B.C.
The two most powerful successors to Alexander, Ptolemy and Seleucus, continued to expand their
domains into territory claimed by other generals of Alexander, and they repeatedly clashed with each
other over land along the eastern coast of the Mediterranean Sea, including the land later called
Palestine.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:2 Three more kings will arise in Persia after Cyrus, and
then a fourth, who will be richer and more powerful than the others. This
fourth king was Xerxes I (486–464 B.C.), who invaded Greece, only to be
defeated at the Battle of Salamis (480).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:3 The prophecy skips over several lesser Persian kings to
focus on the mighty king who will bring down the Persian Empire and rule a
vast realm. He is Alexander the Great (336–323 B.C.). See note on 7:6.
FACT
The mighty king mentioned in 11:3 is Alexander the Great, who reigned
from 336 to 323 B.C. Alexander created one of the largest empires in ancient
history, stretching from Greece to India. He brought the Greek language and
culture to the Middle East, which is why the NT was originally written in
Greek.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:4 as soon as he has arisen, his kingdom shall be
broken and divided toward the four winds of heaven. See note on 8:8.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:5 Ptolemy I Soter (323–285 B.C., king of the south) was a
very capable general under Alexander. He became ruler of Egypt. About the
same time, Seleucus I Nicator (king of the north) started out as a lesser general
under Alexander and was given Babylon to rule. One of the other generals,
Antigonus I Monophthalmus, took over Babylon and caused Seleucus to flee
(c. 316 B.C.) to Ptolemy I Soter in Egypt to serve under him. Thus for a short
time Seleucus I became one of his princes. Then Antigonus was defeated at
Gaza in 312 B.C., and Seleucus returned to Babylon to retake his former
authority. He increased significantly in power and took over the areas of
Babylon, Syria, and Media, so that he was stronger than Ptolemy I Soter.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:6 the daughter of the king of the south shall come to
the king of the north to make an agreement. There was constant conflict
between the Ptolemaic (Egyptian) and Seleucid (Syrian) kingdoms. Around
250 B.C. there was an attempt at peace. Ptolemy II Philadelphus (reigned 285–
246; “the king of the south”) sent his daughter Berenice to marry Antiochus II
Theos (reigned 261–246; “the king of the north”). Antiochus II then planned to
divorce his first wife, Laodice, and disinherit her sons so that he could marry
Berenice and have a child who would rule over the Seleucid kingdom. But
Laodice had Antiochus II and Berenice poisoned, fulfilling the words she shall
not retain the strength of her arm and he and his arm shall not endure.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:7–9 Egypt’s Ptolemy II was succeeded by Berenice’s
brother, Ptolemy III Euergetes I (reigned 246–221 B.C.), a branch from her
roots. In retaliation for the death of his sister, Ptolemy III invaded the Seleucid
kingdom and conquered its capital, Antioch (He shall come against the army
and enter the fortress of the king of the north). He took the Syrian gods and
other precious vessels of silver and gold. He even returned to Egypt some of
the sacred idols taken by the Persian monarch Cambyses in 524 B.C. when he
had sacked the Egyptian temples. Afterward Ptolemy III made a peace treaty
with Seleucus II Callinicus (reigned 246–226 B.C.) and he did refrain from
attacking them so that he could work on expanding his kingdom in the Aegean
area. Verse 9 says that Seleucus II shall come into the realm of the king of
the south, but there is no record of such an invasion, and he must have
retreated hastily (shall return to his own land).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:10 After Seleucus II Callinicus’s death in 226 B.C., his
sons continued fighting with the Ptolemies. Seleucus III was murdered after a
short reign, but his brother took the disorganized state and made it a strong
nation. In 219–218 B.C. Antiochus III advanced through Phoenicia and
Palestine as far as the Ptolemies’ fortress in Raphia.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:11–12 Ptolemy IV Philopator (reigned 221–204 B.C., king
of the south) responded quickly to Antiochus III’s advances. Antiochus III was
defeated at Raphia. Antiochus III’s losses were very high (Ptolemy IV cast
down tens of thousands), yet Ptolemy IV’s victory was short-lived (he shall
not prevail).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:13 After about 15 years, Antiochus III (the Great, reigned
223–187 B.C., the king of the north) invaded Phoenicia and Syria with a great
army. Ptolemy IV had died (203 B.C.), and Antiochus III intended to use the
instability around the young new king, Ptolemy V Epiphanes (reigned 203–180
B.C.), to his advantage. It worked, at least initially, and by 201 B.C. the fortress
of Gaza had been recaptured.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:14 There was instability in the beginning of Ptolemy V
Epiphanes’s reign (many shall rise against the king of the south). A large
number of Jews were tired of the heavy taxation, and thus preferred to be ruled
by the Seleucids. Many Jews revolted (the violent among your own people)
against Egyptian rule. General Scopas of the Egyptian army, angered at their
rebellion, punished the leaders of Jerusalem and Judah.
The Empires of Daniel’ s Visions: The Ptolemies and the Seleucids
(Late)
c. 198–133 B.C.
By the second century B.C., the Seleucid Empire was losing its grip on much of its territory, and the
Roman Empire was rapidly expanding throughout the Mediterranean world. In an attempt to unite his
empire and shore up his defenses against these pressures, Antiochus IV Epiphanes imposed a strict policy
of Hellenization over his domain, which now included the land of Israel. His policy proved too abhorrent
for many Jews, including the Maccabean (also called Hasmonean) family, and in 167 B.C. they led a
revolt that established a new, independent kingdom of Israel.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:15–16 Antiochus III the Great (the king of the north)
fought against General Scopas and the forces of the south at the battle of
Panium, a well-fortified city, in 198 B.C. The Egyptian forces were soundly
defeated and they fled to Sidon, where General Scopas finally surrendered.
Antiochus took control of Phoenicia and Palestine, which remained under
Syrian control until Pompey’s invasion in 63 B.C. established Roman rule.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:17–19 After General Scopas’s surrender, Egypt was
forced into an alliance with the Syrians. Antiochus III the Great even gave his
daughter, Cleopatra (not the famous one from a later period), to Ptolemy V in
marriage. Antiochus III hoped that her offspring would rule over Egypt to give
him further power, but Cleopatra supported Ptolemy V Epiphanes instead of
her father (it shall not stand or be to his advantage). Verses 18–19 record
Antiochus III’s initial successes in the region of the coastlands (a reference to
Asia Minor and possibly also mainland Greece). Ultimately he was defeated by
Roman and Greek troops. The Romans forced him to sign a treaty at Apanea in
188 B.C. and surrender territory, much of his military force, and 20 hostages
(one was his son Antiochus IV Epiphanes). He was also forced to pay a large
tribute to Rome. He returned home and was killed by an angry mob (he shall
stumble and fall) while he was trying to steal from a temple of Zeus in
Elymais to pay for the heavy tribute to Rome.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:20 Seleucus IV Philopater (reigned 187–175 B.C.)
succeeded his father, Antiochus III the Great. Seleucus IV sent a “tax
collector,” Heliodorus, to collect the money to pay Rome their yearly tribute of
1,000 talents. He even tried to steal from the temple in Jerusalem, but decided
against it after being terrified by a dream. Seleucus IV was not killed in anger,
or in battle, but was poisoned by Heliodorus.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:21–23 In his place shall arise a contemptible person.
Antiochus IV Epiphanes (reigned 175–164 B.C.) is the “little horn” of ch. 8. He
took the name Antiochus “Epiphanes,” but others called him “Epimanes”
(“madman”). Seleucus IV Philopater’s son, Demetrius I Soter, was the rightful
heir to the throne. He was imprisoned in Rome, so Antiochus IV Epiphanes
took the throne, even though royal majesty had not been given to him. He
paid off important people for supporting him (obtain the kingdom by
flatteries). Ptolemy VI Philometer (reigned 181–145 B.C.) of Egypt came
against Antiochus IV but was defeated and held as a hostage. Later Ptolemy VI
(the prince of the covenant) made an alliance with Antiochus IV to regain his
throne because his brother (Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II Physcon) had taken it
while he was imprisoned in Syria. This worked, and he received his throne
back. Later he broke this covenant and joined with his brother Ptolemy VIII to
force Antiochus IV out of Pelusium, one of Egypt’s fortress cities.
FACT
The reign of Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175–164 B.C.) was disastrous for the
Jews (11:21–35; see 8:9–14, 23–25). He banned circumcision, ended the
sacrifices, and defiled the temple. Judas Maccabeus led a revolt against him
in 167 B.C.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:24 Without warning, Antiochus IV Epiphanes retaliated
and stole from some of the richest parts of Egypt’s territory. He appeared to
divide the goods among his soldiers, but his grand plans against Egypt’s
strongholds lasted only for a time.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:25–27 These verses appear to refer to the events of
Antiochus IV Epiphanes’s first battle with Egypt and explain in more detail
why Ptolemy VI Philometer was defeated. Ptolemy VI’s own trusted
counselors (those who eat his food) encouraged him to go against Antiochus
IV (his uncle), and he was defeated. Then the two kings, Antiochus IV and
Ptolemy VI (now the former’s prisoner), made a covenant to regain control of
Egypt from Ptolemy VI’s brother, Ptolemy VIII. Neither king intended to keep
the covenant (they shall speak lies to each other). Their alliance had initial
success capturing Memphis, but it failed to capture all of Egypt. Ptolemy VIII
continued to rule in Alexandria. Later the two brothers, Ptolemy VI and
Ptolemy VIII, joined forces and ruled together over all of Egypt.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:28 Antiochus IV Epiphanes returned to his land after
raiding Egypt in 169 B.C. On his way home he stopped in Palestine and found a
rebellion going on. He dealt viciously with the Jews (his heart shall be set
against the holy covenant), killing eighty thousand men, women, and children
and looting the temple. The Jews were furious at the brutality of this ruler and
began a full-fledged revolt.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:29–30 In 168 B.C. (that is, the time appointed by God)
Antiochus IV Epiphanes invaded Egypt again. This time he met with a
humiliating defeat. The Romans had joined forces with the Ptolemies, and
Antiochus IV was no match for the Roman army. In 167 B.C. he turned his
anger toward Palestine (and be enraged and take action against the holy
covenant) and sent his chief tax collector, Apollonius, to Jerusalem. Initially
Apollonius appeared to come in peace, but on the Sabbath he began killing
people and looting the city. He also rewarded those Jews who supported the
Hellenistic policies.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:31–32 Later in 167 B.C., Syrian forces came back to stop
the Jewish religious practices. They entered the temple. They stopped the
regular burnt offering, and on the fifteenth day of Chislev (December), 167
B.C., they set up an altar or idol devoted to Zeus (Jupiter) in the temple (the
abomination that makes desolate; compare 9:27; 12:11). They then offered
up sacrifices (likely swine) on the altar. This act is commonly called the
“abomination of desolation,” which comes from the translation of the Greek
phrase. This is the background for Jesus’ prediction of “the abomination of
desolation spoken of by the prophet Daniel” (Matt. 24:15–16). Antiochus IV’s
flattery enticed some of the Jews to turn against the covenant. But some
faithful Jews (those who know their God) chose to stand strong and die rather
than go against God’s laws, and many did die.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:33–35 the wise among the people shall make many
understand. This likely refers to those who truly fear God and who will
encourage others to fight and even die rather than offer unclean sacrifices to
God. In this time of persecution, the nation will receive a little help, which
probably refers to the small forces that initially rebelled against the Syrians in
Modein, 17 miles (27 km) northwest of Jerusalem. They were led by
Mattathias, a priest, and later by his third son Judas Maccabeus. The rest of v.
34 probably has in view the many who would join themselves to the
Maccabean rebellion out of necessity to save their lives, though it may more
specifically refer to those who joined with the Maccabeans and killed those
who were sympathetic to the Seleucids. Some of the wise shall stumble likely
describes true believers who will die in this persecution. Through this
persecution they will be refined, purified, and made white.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:36 Toward the end of the prophecy, the focus of the
vision seems to shift. It now addresses a situation that is greater than the
persecution under Antiochus IV . The remainder of the chapter is often thought
to deal with the “Antichrist,” which many believe is the figure described in 2
Thess. 2:3–4; Rev. 13:5–8. Though Antiochus IV was powerful, he was able to
do as he wills only up to a point, since the Romans were much more powerful
than he.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:37–38 Antiochus IV viewed himself as a god, as his
nickname “Epiphanes” (“[god] manifest”) made clear. But it is doubtful that he
fulfilled the prophecy that he shall magnify himself above all. He abandoned
the gods of his fathers, including Apollo, and showed no regard for the one
beloved by women, probably the god Adonis or Dionysius. Instead, he
worshiped Zeus, a god who embodied military strength. All these were Greek
gods, so there is some question as to whether Antiochus IV abandoned “the
gods of his fathers.” Instead, the person being described will worship the god
of fortresses and will spend lavishly to support this strength.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:39 The passage probably speaks of a future king, one who
will truly “do as he wills,” will deal with the strongest fortresses, and will
make his followers rulers over many. Many interpreters see here another
prediction of the Antichrist, whom they connect to the “little horn” of ch. 7 and
the ruler of 9:26 who is to come.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:40–41 At the time of the end there will be a major battle
where armies will come from the north and the south to attack this powerful
ruler in the land of Israel (the glorious land). Edom and Moab and the main
part of the Ammonites will escape from him, possibly because of their
connection with Israel or because they are out of his way.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 11:44–45 One striking difference between Antiochus IV
Epiphanes and the Antichrist lies in the events surrounding the king’s death.
Antiochus IV died during a relatively minor campaign against Persia in 164
B.C., not between the sea and Jerusalem after a grand and successful assault on
Egypt. When compared to the precision of fulfillment of the early verses of ch.
11, these later verses may be looking for a greater fulfillment that is yet to
come at the time of the end. the glorious holy mountain. This is the Temple
Mount in Jerusalem.
The Maccabean Kingdom
c. 167–63 B.C.
The Maccabean kingdom of Israel had its beginnings when the priest Mattathias and his family refused to
obey the Seleucid rulers’ order to sacrifice to the pagan god Zeus at Modein. They led a revolt that
initially controlled only the territory of Judea in the vicinity of Jerusalem. Over the next hundred years,
however, the Maccabean rulers slowly added portions of territory to the kingdom until it resembled the
borders of the territory allotted to the Israelite tribes by Joshua.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 12:1–4 A time of trouble unlike any other is a desperate
time. Sometime afterward there will be a resurrection of the dead. Those who
were faithful in life, everyone whose name shall be found written in the
book, will rise to everlasting life in glory, while the others will rise to shame
and everlasting contempt. The faithful will shine brightly like the stars
forever and ever. However, in the meantime, Daniel was instructed to shut up
the words and seal the book. He was to do this because the message of the
book was not fully understandable, and also to keep the message safe for future
generations of God’s people to read.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 12:5–13 Daniel and his angelic companion ask the divine
messenger two related questions: How long shall it be till the end of these
wonders? And what shall be the outcome of these things? The answer to the
question “How long?” has two parts: “for a time, times, and half a time” and
for “1,290 days.” Revelation 11:3 and 12:6 apparently look back to this idea,
though the number in those two verses is 1,260 days. “A time, times, and half a
time” (probably three and a half times) focuses on the limited nature of this
period as half of a complete period of judgment.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 12:10 Those who are wise will be able to determine
specifically when the three and a half years of the tribulation start, namely,
“from the time that the regular burnt offering is taken away.”
FACT
Purity. In 12:10, “white” symbolizes purity, as in clothing that is clean rather
than dirty (see 7:9). “Refined” means purified or cleansed. Revelation
similarly pictures saints wearing white clothes (Rev. 4:4; 7:13–14; 19:8).
DANIEL—NOTE ON 12:11 The specification of 1,290 days emphasizes the
precision with which the period is measured, predetermined by God to the very
day. In this time many will purify themselves, and their enemies will shatter the
Jewish nation. Then God will step in to defend them.
DANIEL—NOTE ON 12:12–13 The additional figure of 1,335 days, 45 days
longer than the 1,290-day period, heightens the sense of mystery that surrounds
the Lord’s timing and emphasizes the need for the saints to persevere under
suffering. God’s people are to go on living faithfully in this corrupt world,
confident of the inheritance that is stored up for them at the end of the days.
H o s e a
(return to table of contents)
Hosea 1 • Hosea 2 • Hosea 3 • Hosea 4 • Hosea 5 • Hosea 6 • Hosea 7
•
Hosea 8 • Hosea 9 • Hosea 10 • Hosea 11 • Hosea 12 • Hosea 13 • Hosea 14
Introduction to Hosea
Timeline
Author and Date
Audience and Purpose
Background and Overview
Key Themes
Outline
The Near East at the Time of Hosea
Global Message of Hosea
Hosea in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Hosea
The Global Message of Hosea for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Hosea
Introduction to Hosea
Timeline
Author and Date
Hosea prophesied during the latter half of the eighth century B.C. (c. 753–722
B.C.). This period was an extremely difficult time in Israel’s history, just before
the northern kingdom went into exile.
Audience and Purpose
Hosea’s primary audience was Ephraim (another name for the northern
kingdom, Israel), which is mentioned 35 times in the book. Hosea wanted to
see Israel turn back to God.
Background and Overview
Israel is the Lord’s bride, but Israel has instead joined itself to Baal, the false
god worshiped in Syria-Palestine. Worshiping Baal violates the first of the Ten
Commandments (Ex. 20:3). It is also a betrayal of God’s intimate union with
his people. Therefore Hosea describes it as spiritual adultery, an offense against
the marriage between the Lord and Israel. He compares Israel’s spiritual
unfaithfulness to the ingratitude of a wayward wife. Such unfaithfulness
justifies the Lord’s coming judgment. But punishment is not ultimately what
the Lord wants for his people. He desires that they leave their sin. He wants
them to return to the One who first loved them and who can provide what is
best for them.
Key Themes
1. Hosea frequently refers to the Pentateuch, the foundation of Israel’s
relationship to God (e.g., 1:10; 6:7; 7:13; 9:6–10; 11:1–4; 12:2–5, 9–10,
12–13; 13:4–6).
2. Hosea stresses divine sovereignty. God speaks in the first person, “I,”
almost a hundred times in the book.
3. Hosea’s personal life illustrates the Lord’s compassion (chs. 1–3).
4. Isolation/exile, which is coming upon Israel, is a way to restoration (1:6–
7; 2:14–23; 5:6–6:3; 11:8–11; 12:9).
Outline
Chapters 1–3 use Hosea’s own marriage as a parable for the relationship
between God and Israel. The dominant image is of Israel as an unfaithful wife.
Chapters 4–14 detail the comparison, with its series of accusations, warnings,
appeals, and motivations for God’s people to return.
I. Biographical: Hosea’s Family (1:1–3:5)
II. Accusations, Warnings, and Promises for Israel (4:1–14:9)
The Near East at the Time of Hosea
c. 740 B.C.
Hosea prophesied to Israel and Judah during the decades leading up to the
fall of the northern kingdom to Assyria. The resurgence of this ancient empire
dominated much of the politics of the ancient Near East from the time of
Jeroboam until Assyria’s demise at the end of the seventh century B.C.
The Global Message of Hosea
Hosea in Redemptive History
The book of Hosea depicts God’s relationship with his people through a
metaphor that occurs throughout the Bible, though nowhere as strongly and
pervasively as in Hosea: the metaphor of marriage. The Lord has yoked
himself to Israel in the most intimate way, likened to the most profound of
human relationships. Tragically, however, Israel has proven faithless—in
the Lord’s stark terms, they have “played the whore” (Hos. 2:5). God’s
people have committed spiritual adultery, going after other gods and
forsaking their sacred relationship with the Lord.
Embedded within the book of Hosea, then, is a powerful and ever-
relevant reminder for God’s people around the world and down through
time. God has bound himself to his people in the most personal, self-giving
way possible. He is theirs; they are his. He and they belong to one another.
They have committed themselves to one another. It is nothing less than
adultery when members of God’s church forsake him to flirt with the idols
of this world, whatever form those idols may take in various parts of the
world.
Hosea’s prophecy comes in the eighth century B.C., as Assyria is
threatening to invade Israel and exile God’s people out of the Promised
Land. After rescuing his people from Egyptian bondage and bringing them
into this land (Exodus—Joshua), God had granted Israel’s wish for a human
king to rule over them (1 Samuel), yet Israel’s kings have continually
proved faithless (1 Samuel—2 Chronicles). God is therefore about to bring
Assyria to conquer and exile Israel.
For the sake of David and the covenant made with him, however (2
Samuel 7), God will restore the kingship one day, and thus restore the
people (see Hos. 3:5). This restoration ultimately comes in Jesus, the true
and final Son of David (Matt. 21:9; Rev. 22:16), who restores the kingdom
(Mark 1:15) and will one day cause every knee all over the world to bow to
him (Phil. 2:9–11; 1 Cor. 15:24–28).
Universal Themes in Hosea
The horror of faithlessness to God. The importance of remaining steadfastly
loyal to the Lord is not a regional concern; all God’s people in all parts of
the world are constantly tempted to compromise or even abandon
faithfulness to God. The specific forms of temptation vary—what tempts a
French believer living in downtown Paris will differ from what entices a
Chilean believer living in the rural Andes mountains. Wherever we live,
however, the core battle remains: will we be faithful to God, or will we
commit spiritual adultery, trusting in the gods of the age in our particular
corner of the world?
God’ s deep compassion for his people. Despite his people’s utter
faithlessness over many generations, God cannot forsake them once and for
all. “How can I give you up, O Ephraim? How can I hand you over, O
Israel? . . . My heart recoils within me; my compassion grows warm and
tender” (Hos. 11:8). God speaks to his wayward people in terms of deep
affection. He has bound himself to them, and while he must discipline them,
even the pain of discipline will serve to restore them (1:6–7; 2:14–23; 3:1–
5; 11:8–11; 14:4–5). Believers today can be confident that as they trust him
wholeheartedly, they cannot finally be separated from the Lord’s love for
them, even amid suffering, persecution, sickness, and economic hardship.
Divine sovereignty and rule. Almost one hundred times throughout
Hosea, God speaks in the first person: “I . . .” It is the Lord who will judge
his people; it is the Lord who will bring punishments on his people; and yet
it is the Lord who will have mercy on his people. The affairs of his
covenant people, and the affairs of the nations of the world, are in God’s
hand. This is great encouragement for believers around the world today.
The Global Message of Hosea for Today
The book of Hosea is rich in relevance for the church today. Because Hosea
describes God’s relationship with his people in terms of marriage, we learn
of the significance God attaches both to the institution of marriage as well
as to the church’s relationship to God.
Human marriage. The divine institution of marriage (see Gen. 2:24;
Matt. 19:3–6) is foundational to the flourishing of human society. Around
the world today, however, various cultural pressures threaten to weaken this
institution. Polygamy, homosexuality, adultery, fatherlessness, and gender
confusion are rampant in different parts of the world. Through the prophecy
of Hosea believers are strengthened as we see the significance of the
covenant bond formed when one man and one woman become one flesh.
We also see that when a spouse is unfaithful, God can restore the marriage
—for God, supremely in Christ, has restored us to himself despite our
faithlessness. He refuses to divorce his people.
Divine marriage. Hosea sobers us with the realization that the human
marriage relationship is instituted by God to portray an even more profound
relationship: that of God to his people. Wherever human beings call on
God’s name through Jesus Christ, regardless of ethnicity or cultural
background, God enters into a covenant relationship with them. God
pledges never to leave or forsake his people in this relationship. They will
be his people, and he will be their God (Jer. 24:7; 31:33; Ezek. 37:27; Zech.
8:8). Ultimately, God secures this relationship through sending his own Son
to redeem a people for himself. The worldwide church is therefore the Bride
of Christ (Eph. 5:32; Rev. 21:9).