DANIEL 5 [†] e King Belshazzar f made a great feast for a thousand of his
g lords and drank wine in front of the thousand.
2 e Belshazzar, when he tasted the wine, commanded that h the vessels of
gold and of silver that Nebuchadnezzar his father [1] had taken out of the
temple in Jerusalem be brought, that the king and his lords, his wives, and
his concubines might drink from them. 3Then they brought in h the golden
vessels that had been taken out of the temple, the house of God in
Jerusalem, and the king and his lords, his wives, and his concubines drank
from them. 4They drank wine and i praised the j gods of gold and silver,
bronze, iron, wood, and stone.
5[†] k Immediately l the fingers of a human hand appeared and wrote on
the plaster of the wall of the king’s palace, opposite the lampstand. And the
king saw m the hand as it wrote. 6
n Then the king’s color changed, o and his
thoughts alarmed him; p his limbs gave way, and q his knees knocked
together.
7 r The king called loudly to bring in r the enchanters, the
s Chaldeans, and t the astrologers. The king declared [2] to the wise men of
Babylon, u “Whoever reads this writing, and shows me its interpretation,
shall be clothed with purple and have a chain of gold around his neck and
v shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.” 8Then all the king’s wise men
came in, but w they could not read the writing or make known to the king
the interpretation. 9Then King Belshazzar was greatly x alarmed, and his
n color changed, and his y lords were perplexed.
10[†]The queen, [3] because of the words of the king and his lords, came
into the banqueting hall, and the queen declared, z “O king, live forever! Let
not your thoughts alarm you a or your color change. 11There is a man in
your kingdom b in whom is the spirit of the holy gods. [4] In the days of
your father, c light and understanding and wisdom like the wisdom of the
gods were found in him, and King Nebuchadnezzar, your father—your
father the king— d made him chief of the magicians, r enchanters,
Chaldeans, and astrologers, 12
e because an excellent spirit, knowledge, and
f understanding f to interpret dreams, explain riddles, and g solve problems
were found in this Daniel, h whom the king named Belteshazzar. Now let
Daniel be called, and he will show the interpretation.”
Daniel Interprets the Handwriting
13[†]Then Daniel was brought in before the king. The king answered and
said to Daniel, “You are that Daniel, one of i the exiles of Judah, whom the
king my father brought from Judah. 14I have heard of you that b the spirit of
the gods [5] is in you, and that c light and understanding and excellent
wisdom are found in you. 15Now j the wise men, the k enchanters, have
been brought in before me to read this writing and make known to me its
interpretation, but l they could not show the interpretation of the matter.
16 m But I have heard that you can give interpretations and n solve problems.
o Now if you can read the writing and make known to me its interpretation,
o you shall be clothed with purple and have a chain of gold around your
neck and p shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.”
17Then Daniel answered and said before the king, q “Let your gifts be for
yourself, and give your rewards to another. Nevertheless, I will read the
writing to the king and make known to him the interpretation. 18[†]O king,
the r Most High God s gave t Nebuchadnezzar your father u kingship and
greatness and glory and majesty.
19And because of the greatness that he
gave him, v all peoples, nations, and languages w trembled and feared
before him. Whom he would, he killed, and whom he would, he kept alive;
whom he would, he raised up, and whom he would, he humbled. 20But
x when his heart was lifted up and his spirit was hardened so that he dealt
proudly, y he was brought down from his kingly throne, and his glory was
taken from him. 21 z He was driven from among the children of mankind,
and his mind was made like that of a beast, and his dwelling was with the
wild donkeys. He was fed grass like an ox, and his body was wet with the
dew of heaven, z until he knew that the r Most High God rules the kingdom
of mankind and sets over it whom he will. 22And you his son, [6]
a Belshazzar, b have not humbled your heart, though you knew all this,
23[†]but you have lifted up yourself against c the Lord of heaven. And d the
vessels of his house have been brought in before you, and you and your
lords, your wives, and your concubines have drunk wine from them. e And
you have praised the gods of silver and gold, of bronze, iron, wood, and
stone, which do not see or hear or know, f but the God in whose hand is
your breath, and g whose are all your ways, h you have not honored.
24“Then from his presence i the hand was sent, and this writing was
inscribed. 25[†]And this is the writing that was inscribed: MENE, MENE,
TEKEL, and PARSIN.
26This is the interpretation of the matter: MENE, God
has numbered [7] the days of your kingdom and brought it to an end;
27TEKEL, j you have been weighed [8] in the balances and found wanting;
28[†]PERES, your kingdom is divided and given to k the Medes and
l Persians.” [9]
29Then a Belshazzar gave the command, and Daniel m was clothed with
purple, a chain of gold was put around his neck, and a proclamation was
made about him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.
30[†] n That very night a Belshazzar the o Chaldean king was killed. 31 [10]
And p Darius k the Mede received the kingdom, being about sixty-two years
old.
Daniel and the Lions’ Den