DANIEL 6 [†]It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom q 120 r satraps, to be
throughout the whole kingdom; 2and over them s three high officials, of
whom Daniel was one, to whom these r satraps should give account, so that
the king might suffer no loss. 3Then this Daniel became t distinguished
above all s the other high officials and r satraps, because u an excellent spirit
was in him. And the king planned v to set him over the whole kingdom.
4[†]Then s the high officials and r the satraps w sought to find a ground for
complaint against Daniel with regard to the kingdom, x but they could find
no ground for complaint or any fault, because he was faithful, x and no error
or fault was found in him. 5Then these men said, “We shall not find any
ground for complaint against this Daniel unless we find it in connection
with the law of his God.”
6[†]Then these s high officials and r satraps came by agreement [1] to the
king and said to him, “O y King Darius, live forever! 7All the s high
officials of the kingdom, the prefects and the satraps, the z counselors and
the governors are agreed that the king should establish an ordinance and
enforce an a injunction, that whoever makes petition to any god or man for
thirty days, except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions.
8[†]Now, O king, establish a the injunction and sign the document, so that it
cannot be changed, according to b the law of c the Medes and the Persians,
d which cannot be revoked.” 9Therefore King Darius signed the document
and a injunction.
10[†]When Daniel knew that the document had been signed, he went to
his house where e he had windows in his upper chamber open f toward
Jerusalem. He got down on his knees g three times a day and prayed and
h gave thanks before his God, as he had done previously.
11Then these men
came by agreement and found Daniel making petition and plea before his
God. 12Then they i came near and said before the king, concerning the
injunction, “O king! Did you not sign j an injunction, that anyone who
makes petition to any god or man within thirty days except to you, O king,
shall be cast into the den of lions?” The king answered and said, “The thing
stands fast, according to the law of c the Medes and Persians, d which
cannot be revoked.” 13Then they answered and said before the king,
k “Daniel, who is one l of the exiles k from Judah, m pays no attention to
you, O king, or j the injunction you have signed, but makes his petition
g three times a day.”
14Then n the king, when he heard these words, n was much distressed and
set his mind to deliver Daniel. And he labored till the sun went down to
rescue him. 15Then these men came by agreement to the king and said to
the king, “Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians that no
j injunction or ordinance that the king establishes can be changed.”
16[†]Then the king commanded, and Daniel was brought and cast into the
den of lions. The king declared [2] to Daniel, “May o your God, whom you
serve continually, deliver you!” 17
p And a stone was brought and laid on the
mouth of the den, q and the king sealed it r with his own signet and with the
signet of his s lords, that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel.
18Then the king went to his palace and spent the night fasting; t no
diversions were brought to him, and u sleep fled from him.
19[†]Then, at break of day, the king arose and went in haste to the den of
lions. 20As he came near to the den where Daniel was, he cried out in a tone
of anguish. The king declared to Daniel, “O Daniel, servant of v the living
God, o has your God, whom you serve continually, w been able to deliver
you from the lions?” 21Then Daniel said to the king, x “O king, live forever!
22My God y sent his angel z and shut the lions’ mouths, and they have not
harmed me, because I was found blameless a before him; a and also before
you, O king, I have done no harm.” 23Then the king was exceedingly glad,
and commanded that Daniel be taken up out of the den. So Daniel was
taken up out of the den, and b no kind of harm was found on him, because
he had trusted in his God. 24[†]And the king commanded, and c those men
who had maliciously accused Daniel were brought and cast into the den of
lions—they, their children, and their wives. And before they reached the
bottom of the den, the lions overpowered them and broke all their bones in
pieces.
25[†]Then King Darius wrote to all d the peoples, nations, and languages
e that dwell in all the earth: f “Peace be multiplied to you. 26 g I make a
decree, that in all my royal dominion h people are to tremble and fear before
the God of Daniel,
for i he is j the living God,
enduring forever;
his kingdom shall never be destroyed,
j and his dominion shall be k to the end.
27 He delivers and rescues;
he works l signs and wonders
in heaven and on earth,
he who has m saved Daniel
from the power of the lions.”
28[†]So this Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and n the reign
of o Cyrus the Persian.
Daniel’s Vision of the Four Beasts