DANIEL 11 [†]“And as for me, u in the first year of u Darius the Mede, I
stood up to confirm and strengthen him.
2[†]“And now I will show you v the truth. Behold, three more kings shall
arise in Persia, and a fourth shall be far richer than all of them. And when
he has become strong through his riches, he shall stir up all against the
kingdom of Greece. 3[†]Then w a mighty king shall arise, who shall rule
with great dominion and x do as he wills. 4[†]And as soon as he has arisen,
y his kingdom shall be broken and divided y toward the z four winds of
heaven, but a not to his posterity, nor according to the authority with which
he ruled, for his kingdom shall be plucked up and go to others besides
these.
5[†]“Then the king of the south shall be strong, but one of his princes
shall be stronger than he b and shall rule, and his authority shall be a great
authority.
6[†]After some years c they shall make an alliance, and the
daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the north to make
an agreement. But she shall not retain the strength of her arm, and he and
his arm shall not endure, but she shall be given up, and her attendants, he
who fathered her, and he who supported [1] her in those times.
7[†]“And from a branch from her roots one shall arise in his place. He
shall come against the army and enter the d fortress of the king of the north,
and he shall deal with them and shall prevail. 8He shall also carry off to
Egypt their gods with their metal images and their precious e vessels of
silver and gold, and for some years he shall refrain from attacking the king
of the north. 9Then the latter shall come into the realm of the king of the
south but shall return to his own land.
10[†]“His sons shall wage war and assemble a multitude of great forces,
which shall keep coming f and overflow and pass through, and again shall
carry the war as far as his d fortress. 11[†]Then the king of the south,
g moved with rage, shall come out and fight against the king of the north.
h And he shall raise a great multitude, but it shall be given into his hand.
12And when the multitude is taken away, his heart shall be exalted, and he
shall cast down tens of thousands, but he shall not prevail. 13[†]For the king
of the north shall again i raise a multitude, greater than the first. And j after
some years [2] he shall come on with a great army and abundant supplies.
14[†]“In those times many shall rise against the king of the south, and the
violent among your own people shall lift themselves up in order to fulfill
the vision, but k they shall fail. 15[†]Then the king of the north shall come
and l throw up siegeworks and take a well-fortified city. And the forces of
the south shall not stand, or even his best troops, for there shall be no
strength to stand. 16But he who comes against him shall m do as he wills,
and n none shall stand before him. And he shall stand in o the glorious land,
with destruction in his hand. 17[†]He shall p set his face to come with the
strength of his whole kingdom, and he shall bring terms of an agreement
and perform them. He shall give him the daughter of women to destroy the
kingdom, [3] but it shall not stand or be to his advantage. 18Afterward he
shall turn his face to the coastlands and shall capture many of them, but a
commander shall put an end to his insolence. Indeed, [4] he q shall turn his
insolence back upon him. 19Then he shall turn his face back toward the
r fortresses of his own land, but he shall s stumble and fall, t and shall not
be found.
20[†]“Then shall arise in his place one who shall send an u exactor of
tribute for the glory of the kingdom. But within a few days he shall be
broken, neither in anger nor in battle. 21[†]In his place shall arise a
contemptible person to whom royal majesty has not been given. v He shall
come in without warning and obtain the kingdom w by flatteries. 22Armies
shall be x utterly swept away before him and broken, even the prince of the
covenant. 23And from the time that an alliance is made with him he shall act
deceitfully, and he shall become strong with a small people. 24[†] y Without
warning he shall come into z the richest parts [5] of the province, and he
shall do what neither his fathers nor his fathers’ fathers have done,
scattering among them plunder, spoil, and goods. He shall devise plans
against strongholds, but only for a time. 25[†]And he shall stir up his power
and his heart against a the king of the south with a great army. And the king
of the south shall wage war with an exceedingly great and mighty army, but
he shall not stand, for plots shall be devised against him. 26Even those who
eat his food shall break him. His army shall be b swept away, and many
shall fall down slain. 27And as for the two kings, their hearts shall be bent
on doing evil. They shall speak lies at the same table, but to no avail, for
c the end is yet to be at the time appointed. 28[†]And he shall return to his
land with great wealth, but his heart shall be set against the holy covenant.
And he shall work his will and return to his own land.
29[†]“At the time appointed he shall return and come into the south, but it
shall not be this time as it was before. 30For ships of d Kittim shall come
against him, and he shall be afraid and withdraw, and shall turn back and
e be enraged and e take action against the holy covenant. He shall turn back
and pay attention to those who forsake the holy covenant. 31[†]Forces from
him shall appear and f profane the temple and fortress, and shall take away
the regular burnt offering. And g they shall set up the abomination that
makes desolate. 32He shall seduce with flattery those who violate the
covenant, but the people who know their God shall stand firm and take
action. 33[†] h And the wise among the people shall make many understand,
though for some days they shall stumble by sword and flame, by captivity
and plunder.
34When they stumble, they shall receive a little help. And
many shall join themselves to them with flattery,
35and some of the wise
shall stumble, so that they may be refined, i purified, and j made white, until
k the time of the end, k for it still awaits the appointed time.
36[†]“And the king shall l do as he wills. m He shall exalt himself and
magnify himself above every god, n and shall speak astonishing things
against o the God of gods. p He shall prosper q till the indignation is
accomplished; for what is decreed shall be done. 37[†]He shall pay no
attention to the gods of his fathers, or to the one beloved by women. He
shall not pay attention to any other god, for m he shall magnify himself
above all. 38He shall honor the god of fortresses instead of these. A god
whom his fathers did not know he shall honor r with gold and silver, with
precious stones and costly gifts. 39[†]He shall deal with the strongest
fortresses with the help of a foreign god. Those who acknowledge him he
shall load with honor. He shall make them rulers over many and s shall
divide the land for a price. [6]
40[†] t “At the time of the end, the king of the south shall attack [7] him,
but the king of the north shall rush upon him u like a whirlwind, with
chariots and horsemen, and with many ships. And he shall come into
countries and v shall overflow and pass through. 41He shall come into w the
glorious land. And tens of thousands shall fall, but these shall be delivered
out of his hand: x Edom and x Moab and the main part of the x Ammonites.
42He shall stretch out his hand against the countries, and the land of Egypt
shall not escape. 43He shall become ruler of the treasures of gold and of
silver, and all the precious things of Egypt, and the y Libyans and the
z Cushites shall follow in his train. 44[†]But news from the east and the
north shall alarm him, and he shall go out with great fury to destroy and
devote many to destruction. 45And he shall pitch his palatial tents between
the sea and the glorious holy mountain. Yet he shall come to his end, with
none to help him.
The Time of the End