DANIEL 10 [†] b In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a word was
revealed to Daniel, c who was named Belteshazzar. And d the word was
true, and it was a great conflict. [1] And e he understood the word and e had
understanding of the vision.
2[†]In those days I, Daniel, was mourning for f three weeks. 3I ate no
delicacies, no meat or wine entered my mouth, nor did I g anoint myself at
all, for f the full three weeks. 4On the twenty-fourth day of the first month,
as I was standing h on the bank of the great river ( i that is, the Tigris) 5[†] j I
lifted up my eyes and looked, and behold, k a man clothed in linen, l with a
belt of fine m gold from Uphaz around his waist. 6His body was like n beryl,
his face o like the appearance of lightning, p his eyes like flaming torches,
his arms and q legs like the gleam of burnished bronze, and q the sound of
his words like the sound of a multitude. 7 r And I, Daniel, alone saw the
vision, for the men who were with me did not see the vision, but a great
trembling fell upon them, and they fled to hide themselves. 8So I was left
alone and saw this great vision, and s no strength was left in me. My radiant
appearance was fearfully changed, [2] t and I retained no strength. 9Then I
heard the sound of his words, u and as I heard the sound of his words, I fell
on my face in deep sleep u with my face to the ground.
10[†]And behold, v a hand touched me and set me trembling on my hands
and knees. 11And he said to me, “O Daniel, w man greatly loved,
x understand the words that I speak to you, and y stand upright, for z now I
have been sent to you.” And when he had spoken this word to me, I stood
up trembling. 12Then he said to me, a “Fear not, Daniel, for from the first
day that you b set your heart to understand and b humbled yourself before
your God, c your words have been heard, d and I have come because of your
words. 13[†] e The prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me f twenty-
one days, but g Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me, for I was
left there with the kings of Persia, 14 d and came to make you understand
what is to happen to your people h in the latter days. For i the vision is for
days yet to come.”
15[†]When he had spoken to me according to these words, j I turned my
face toward the ground k and was mute. 16And behold, l one in the likeness
of the children of man m touched my lips. Then I opened my mouth and
spoke. I said to him who stood before me, “O my lord, by reason of the
vision pains have come upon me, and n I retain no strength. 17How can my
lord’s servant talk with my lord? For now no strength remains in me, and no
breath is left in me.”
18Again l one having the appearance of a man m touched me and
strengthened me. 19And he said, o “O man greatly loved, p fear not, peace
be with you; be strong and of good courage.” And as he spoke to me, I was
strengthened and said, “Let my lord speak, for you have strengthened me.”
20[†]Then he said, “Do you know why I have come to you? But now I will
return to fight against the q prince of Persia; and when I go out, behold, the
prince of r Greece will come. 21[†]But I will tell you s what is inscribed in
the book of truth: there is none who contends by my side against these
except t Michael, your prince.
The Kings of the South and the North