DANIEL 2 [†]In the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar,
Nebuchadnezzar had dreams; h his spirit was troubled, and i his sleep left
him. 2[†]Then the king commanded that d the magicians, e the enchanters,
the j sorcerers, and k the Chaldeans be summoned to tell the king his
dreams. So they came in and l stood before the king. 3And the king said to
them, “I had a dream, and h my spirit is troubled to know the dream.”
4[†]Then k the Chaldeans said to the king in Aramaic, [1] m “O king, live
forever! Tell your servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.”
5[†]The king answered and said to k the Chaldeans, “The word from me is
firm: if you do not make known to me the dream and its interpretation, you
shall be n torn limb from limb, n and your o houses shall be laid in ruins.
6But if you show the dream and its interpretation, p you shall receive from
me gifts and rewards and great honor. q Therefore show me the dream and
its interpretation.” 7They answered a second time and said, “Let the king
tell his servants the dream, and we will show its interpretation.” 8The king
answered and said, “I know with certainty that you are trying to r gain time,
because you see that the word from me is firm— 9if you do not make the
dream known to me, s there is but one sentence for you. You have agreed to
speak lying and corrupt words before me till t the times change. u Therefore
tell me the dream, and I shall know that you can show me its
interpretation.” 10 v The Chaldeans answered the king and said, “There is not
a man on earth who can meet the king’s demand, for no great and powerful
king has asked such a thing of any magician or enchanter or v Chaldean.
11[†]The thing that the king asks is difficult, and no one can show it to the
king except w the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.”
12Because of this the king was angry and x very furious, and
y commanded that all z the wise men of Babylon be destroyed. 13So the
decree went out, and the wise men were about to be killed; and they sought
a Daniel and his companions, to kill them. 14[†]Then Daniel replied with
prudence and discretion to b Arioch, the c captain of the king’s guard, who
had gone out to kill the wise men of Babylon. 15[†]He declared [2] to
Arioch, the king’s captain, “Why is the decree of the king d so urgent?”
Then Arioch made the matter known to Daniel. 16And Daniel went in and
requested the king to appoint him a time, that he might show the
interpretation to the king.
God Reveals Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream
17Then Daniel went to his house and made the matter known to e Hananiah,
e Mishael, and e Azariah, his companions, 18
f and told them to seek mercy
from the g God of heaven concerning this mystery, so that Daniel and his
companions might not h be destroyed with the rest of the wise men of
Babylon. 19Then the mystery was revealed to Daniel in i a vision of the
night. Then Daniel j blessed the g God of heaven. 20Daniel answered and
said:
k “Blessed be the name of God forever and ever,
l to whom belong wisdom and might.
21 m He changes times and seasons;
n he removes kings and sets up kings;
o he gives wisdom to the wise
o and knowledge to those who have understanding;
22
p he reveals deep and hidden things;
p he knows what is in the darkness,
q and the light dwells with him.
23[†] To you, O r God of my fathers,
s I give thanks and praise,
for t you have given me wisdom and might,
and have now made known to me what u we asked of you,
for you have made known to us the king’s matter.”
24Therefore Daniel went in to v Arioch, whom the king had appointed to
destroy the wise men of Babylon. He went and said thus to him: “Do not
destroy the wise men of Babylon; bring me in before the king, and I will
show the king the interpretation.”
25[†]Then v Arioch brought in Daniel before the king w in haste and said
thus to him: “I have found x among the exiles from Judah a man who will
make known to the king the interpretation.” 26The king declared to Daniel,
y whose name was Belteshazzar, z “Are you able to make known to me the
dream that I have seen and its interpretation?” 27Daniel answered the king
and said, “No wise men, a enchanters, a magicians, or b astrologers can
show to the king the mystery that the king has asked, 28but c there is a God
in heaven who reveals mysteries, and he has made known to King
Nebuchadnezzar d what will be in the latter days. Your dream and e the
visions of your head as you lay in bed are these: 29To you, O king, as you
lay in bed came thoughts of what would be after this, f and he who reveals
mysteries made known to you what is to be. 30[†]But g as for me, this
mystery has been revealed to me, not because of any wisdom that I have
more than all the living, but in order that the interpretation may be made
known to the king, and that h you may know the thoughts of your mind.
Daniel Interprets the Dream
31“You saw, O king, and behold, a great image. This image, mighty and of
exceeding brightness, stood before you, and its appearance was frightening.
32 i The head of this image was of fine gold, j its chest and arms of silver, its
middle and j thighs of bronze, 33 k its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and
partly of clay.
34As you looked, a stone was cut out l by no human hand,
and it struck the image on its feet of iron and clay, and m broke them in
pieces. 35Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold, all
together were broken in pieces, and became n like the chaff of the summer
threshing floors; and the wind carried them away, so that o not a trace of
them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became p a great
mountain q and filled the whole earth.
36“This was the dream. Now we will tell the king its interpretation.
37[†]You, O king, r the king of kings, to whom s the God of heaven t has
given the kingdom, the power, and the might, and the glory,
38and into
whose hand he has given, wherever they dwell, the children of man, u the
beasts of the field, and the birds of the heavens, making you rule over them
all—you are v the head of gold. 39[†] w Another kingdom inferior to you
shall arise after you, and yet a third kingdom v of bronze, x which shall rule
over all the earth. 40[†]And y there shall be a fourth kingdom, strong as iron,
because iron z breaks to pieces and shatters all things. And like iron that
crushes, it shall z break and crush all these. 41And as you saw a the feet and
toes, partly of potter’s clay and partly of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom,
but some of the y firmness of iron shall be in it, just as you saw iron mixed
with the soft clay.
42And as the toes of the feet were partly iron and partly
clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly brittle. 43[†]As you
saw the iron mixed with soft clay, so they will mix with one another in
marriage, [3] but they will not hold together, just as iron does not mix with
clay.
44And in the days of those kings b the God of heaven will set up c a
kingdom that shall never be destroyed, nor shall the kingdom be left to
another people. d It shall break in pieces all these kingdoms and bring them
to an end, and c it shall stand forever,
45just as e you saw that f a stone was
cut from a mountain by no human hand, and that d it broke in pieces the
iron, the bronze, the clay, the silver, and the gold. A g great God has made
known to the king what shall be after this. The dream is certain, and its
interpretation sure.”
Daniel Is Promoted
46[†]Then King Nebuchadnezzar h fell upon his face and i paid homage to
Daniel, and commanded that j an offering and k incense be offered up to
him. 47The king answered and said to Daniel, “Truly, your l God is God of
gods and m Lord of kings, and n a revealer of mysteries, for you have been
able to reveal this mystery.” 48Then the king gave Daniel high honors and
many great o gifts, and made him ruler over the whole p province of
Babylon and q chief prefect over all the wise men of Babylon. 49Daniel
made a request of the king, and he r appointed s Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego over the affairs of p the province of Babylon. But Daniel
t remained at the king’s court.
Nebuchadnezzar’s Golden Image