DEUTERONOMY 10 [†]“At that time the LORD said to me, l ‘Cut for yourself
two tablets of stone like the first, and come up to me on the mountain and
m make an ark of wood. 2And I will write on the tablets the words that were
on the first tablets that you broke, and n you shall put them in the ark.’ 3So I
made an ark o of acacia wood, and p cut two tablets of stone like the first,
and went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hand. 4And q he wrote
on the tablets, in the same writing as before, the Ten Commandments [1]
r that the LORD had spoken to you on the mountain out of the midst of the
fire s on the day of the assembly. And the LORD gave them to me. 5Then I
turned and t came down from the mountain and u put the tablets in the ark
that I had made. v And there they are, as the LORD commanded me.”
6[†](The people of Israel w journeyed from Beeroth Bene-jaakan [2] to
Moserah. x There Aaron died, and there he was buried. And his son Eleazar
ministered as priest in his place. 7 y From there they journeyed to Gudgodah,
and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land with brooks of water.
8At that time
z the LORD set apart the tribe of Levi a to carry the ark of the covenant of
the LORD b to stand before the LORD to minister to him and c to bless in his
name, to this day.
9 d Therefore Levi has no portion or inheritance with his
brothers. The LORD is his inheritance, as the LORD your God said to him.)
10
e “I myself stayed on the mountain, as at the first time, forty days and
forty nights, f and the LORD listened to me that time also. The LORD was
unwilling to destroy you. 11[†] g And the LORD said to me, ‘Arise, go on
your journey at the head of the people, so that they may go in and possess
the land, which I swore to their fathers to give them.’
Circumcise Your Heart
12[†]“And now, Israel, h what does the LORD your God require of you, but
i to fear the LORD your God, j to walk in all his ways, k to love him, to serve
the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul, 13and l to
keep the commandments and statutes of the LORD, which I am commanding
you today m for your good? 14[†]Behold, n to the LORD your God belong
heaven and the heaven of heavens, o the earth with all that is in it. 15Yet
p the LORD set his heart in love on your fathers and chose their offspring
after them, you above all peoples, as you are this day.
16[†]Circumcise
therefore q the foreskin of your heart, and be no longer r stubborn. 17[†]For
the LORD your God is s God of gods and t Lord of lords, u the great, the
mighty, and the awesome God, who is v not partial and takes no bribe.
18 w He executes justice for the fatherless and the widow, and loves the
sojourner, giving him food and clothing. 19
x Love the sojourner, therefore,
for you were sojourners in the land of Egypt. 20[†] i You shall fear the LORD
your God. You shall serve him and y hold fast to him, and z by his name you
shall swear.
21
a He is your praise. He is your God, b who has done for you
these great and terrifying things that your eyes have seen. 22[†]Your fathers
went down to Egypt c seventy persons, and now the LORD your God has
made you d as numerous as the stars of heaven.
Love and Serve the LORD