DEUTERONOMY 18 [†]“The Levitical priests, all the tribe of Levi, n shall
have no portion or inheritance with Israel. They o shall eat the LORD’s food
offerings [1] as their [2] inheritance. 2They shall have no inheritance among
their brothers; the LORD is their inheritance, as he promised them. 3[†]And
this shall be the priests’ due from the people, from those offering a sacrifice,
whether an ox or a sheep: p they shall give to the priest the shoulder and the
two cheeks and the stomach. 4
q The firstfruits of your grain, of your wine
and of your oil, and the first fleece of your sheep, you shall give him. 5For
the LORD your God has chosen him out of all your tribes r to stand and
minister in the name of the LORD, him and his sons for all time.
6[†]“And if a Levite comes from any of your towns out of all Israel,
s where he lives—and he may come when he desires [3]— t to the place that
the LORD will choose, 7and ministers in the name of the LORD his God,
u like all his fellow Levites who stand to minister there before the LORD,
8then he may have equal v portions to eat, besides what he receives from the
sale of his patrimony. [4]
Abominable Practices
9[†]“When you come into the land that the LORD your God is giving you,
w you shall not learn to follow the abominable practices of those nations.
10There shall not be found among you anyone x who burns his son or his
daughter as an offering, [5] anyone who y practices divination or z tells
fortunes or interprets omens, or a a sorcerer 11or a charmer or b a medium or
a necromancer or c one who inquires of the dead, 12[†] d for whoever does
these things is an abomination to the LORD. And e because of these
abominations the LORD your God is driving them out before you. 13You
shall be blameless before the LORD your God, 14for these nations, which
you are about to dispossess, listen to fortune-tellers and to diviners. But as
for you, the LORD your God has not allowed you to do this.
A New Prophet like Moses
15[†] f “The LORD your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from
among you, from your brothers—it is to him you shall listen— 16just as you
desired of the LORD your God at Horeb g on the day of the assembly, when
you said, h ‘Let me not hear again the voice of the LORD my God or see this
great fire any more, lest I die.’ 17And the LORD said to me, i ‘They are right
in what they have spoken. 18 f I will raise up for them a prophet like you
from among their brothers. j And I will put my words in his mouth, and k he
shall speak to them all that I command him. 19
l And whoever will m not
listen to my words that he shall speak in my name, I myself will require it
of him. 20[†] n But the prophet who presumes to speak a word in my name
that I have not commanded him to speak, or [6] who speaks in the name of
other gods, that same prophet shall die.’ 21And if you say in your heart,
‘How may we know the word that the LORD has not spoken?’— 22 o when a
prophet speaks in the name of the LORD, if the word does not come to pass
or come true, that is a word that the LORD has not spoken; n the prophet has
spoken it presumptuously. You need not be afraid of him.
Laws Concerning Cities of Refuge