DEUTERONOMY 7 [†]“When the e LORD your God brings you into the land
that you are entering to take possession of it, and clears away many nations
before you, f the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations g more numerous
and mightier than you, 2 h and when the LORD your God gives them over to
you, and you defeat them, then you must i devote them to complete
destruction. [1] j You shall make no covenant with them and show no mercy
to them. 3[†] k You shall not intermarry with them, giving your daughters to
their sons or taking their daughters for your sons, 4for they would turn away
your sons from following me, to serve other gods. l Then the anger of the
LORD would be kindled against you, and he would destroy you m quickly.
5[†]But thus shall you deal with them: n you shall break down their altars
and dash in pieces their n pillars and chop down their n Asherim and o burn
their carved images with fire.
6[†]“For p you are a people holy to the LORD your God. The LORD your
God has chosen you to be p a people for his treasured possession, out of all
the peoples who are on the face of the earth. 7It was not because you were
more in number than any other people that the LORD set his love on you and
chose you, for you were the fewest of all peoples, 8but q it is because the
LORD loves you and is keeping r the oath that he swore to your fathers, that
the LORD has brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed you from
the house of slavery, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. 9Know
therefore that the LORD your God is God, s the faithful God t who keeps
covenant and steadfast love with those who love him and keep his
commandments, to a thousand generations, 10and u repays to their face
those who hate him, by destroying them. v He will not be slack with one
who hates him. He will repay him to his face. 11 w You shall therefore be
careful to do the commandment and the statutes and the rules that I
command you today.
12[†] x “And because you listen to these rules and keep and do them, the
LORD your God will keep with you y the covenant and the steadfast love
that he swore to your fathers. 13He will z love you, bless you, and multiply
you. a He will also bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your
ground, your grain and your wine and your oil, the increase of your herds
and the young of your flock, in the land that he swore to your fathers to give
you. 14You shall be blessed above all peoples. b There shall not be male or
female barren among you or among your livestock. 15And the LORD will
take away from you all sickness, and none of the evil c diseases of Egypt,
which you knew, will he inflict on you, but he will lay them on all who hate
you. 16And d you shall consume all the peoples that the LORD your God will
give over to you. e Your eye shall not pity them, neither shall you serve
their gods, for that would be f a snare to you.
17[†]“If you say in your heart, ‘These nations are greater than I. How can
I dispossess them?’ 18 g you shall not be afraid of them but you shall
h remember what the LORD your God did to Pharaoh and to all Egypt, 19the
great trials that your eyes saw, i the signs, the wonders, the mighty hand,
and the outstretched arm, by which the LORD your God brought you out. So
will the LORD your God do to all the peoples of whom you are afraid.
20[†]Moreover, j the LORD your God will send hornets among them, until
those who are left and hide themselves from you are destroyed. 21You shall
not be in dread of them, for the LORD your God is k in your midst, l a great
and awesome God. 22 m The LORD your God will clear away these nations
before you little by little. You may not make an end of them at once, [2] lest
the wild beasts grow too numerous for you. 23 n But the LORD your God will
give them over to you and throw them into great confusion, until they are
destroyed. 24And o he will give their kings into your hand, and you shall
p make their name perish from under heaven. q No one shall be able to
stand against you until you have destroyed them. 25[†]The carved images of
their gods r you shall burn with fire. You s shall not covet the silver or the
gold that is on them or take it for yourselves, lest you be t ensnared by it,
for it is an abomination to the LORD your God. 26And you shall not bring an
abominable thing into your house and become devoted to destruction [3] like
it. You shall utterly detest and abhor it, u for it is devoted to destruction.
Remember the LORD Your God
DEUTERONOMY 8 “The whole commandment that I command you today
v you shall be careful to do, that you may live and multiply, and go in and
possess the land that the LORD swore to give to your fathers. 2[†]And you
shall remember the whole way that the LORD your God has led you w these
forty years in the wilderness, that he might humble you, x testing you y to
know what was in your heart, z whether you would keep his commandments
or not. 3And he humbled you and a let you hunger and b fed you with
manna, which you did not know, nor did your fathers know, that he might
make you know that c man does not live by bread alone, but man lives by
every word [1] that comes from the mouth of the LORD.
4[†] d Your clothing
did not wear out on you and your foot did not swell these forty years.
5[†]Know then in your heart that, e as a man disciplines his son, the LORD
your God disciplines you. 6So you shall keep the commandments of the
LORD your God by walking in his ways and by fearing him. 7For the LORD
your God is bringing you into a good land, f a land of brooks of water, of
fountains and springs, flowing out in the valleys and hills, 8a land of wheat
and barley, g of vines and fig trees and pomegranates, a land of olive trees
and honey,
9a land in which you will eat bread without scarcity, in which
you will lack nothing, a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills
you can dig copper.
10And you shall eat and be full, and you shall bless the
LORD your God for the good land he has given you.
11“Take care lest you forget the LORD your God by not keeping his
commandments and his rules and his statutes, which I command you today,
12 h lest, when you have eaten and are full and have built good houses and
live in them, 13and when your herds and flocks multiply and your silver and
gold is multiplied and all that you have is multiplied, 14[†] i then your heart
be lifted up, and you j forget the LORD your God, who brought you out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery,
15[†]who k led you through
the great and terrifying wilderness, l with its fiery serpents and scorpions
m and thirsty ground where there was no water, n who brought you water
out of the flinty rock, 16who fed you in the wilderness with o manna that
your fathers did not know, that he might humble you and test you, p to do
you good in the end. 17[†]Beware q lest you say in your heart, ‘My power
and the might of my hand have gotten me this wealth.’ 18You shall
remember the LORD your God, for r it is he who gives you power to get
wealth, s that he may confirm his covenant that he swore to your fathers, as
it is this day.
19[†]And if you forget the LORD your God and go after other
gods and serve them and worship them, t I solemnly warn you today that
you shall surely perish. 20Like the nations that the LORD makes to perish
before you, u so shall you perish, because you would not obey the voice of
the LORD your God.
Not Because of Righteousness