DEUTERONOMY 1 [†]These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel
beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in a the Arabah opposite b Suph,
between c Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Dizahab. 2[†]It is eleven
days’ journey from Horeb by the way of Mount Seir to d Kadesh-barnea.
3
e In the fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses spoke
to the people of Israel according to all that the LORD had given him in
commandment to them, 4after f he had defeated Sihon the king of the
Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and g Og the king of Bashan, who lived in
Ashtaroth and in h Edrei. 5[†]Beyond the Jordan, i in the land of Moab,
Moses undertook to explain this law, saying, 6[†]“The LORD our God said to
us in Horeb, j ‘You have stayed long enough at this mountain. 7[†]Turn and
take your journey, and go to k the hill country of the Amorites and to all
their neighbors in a the Arabah, l in the hill country and in the lowland and
in the Negeb and l by the seacoast, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon,
as far as the great river, the river Euphrates. 8[†]See, I have set the land
before you. Go in and take possession of the land that the LORD swore to
your fathers, m to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them and to
their offspring after them.’
Leaders Appointed
9“At that time n I said to you, ‘I am not able to bear you by myself. 10[†]The
LORD your God has multiplied you, and behold, o you are today as
numerous as the stars of heaven. 11 p May the LORD, the God of your fathers,
make you a thousand times as many as you are and bless you, q as he has
promised you! 12 r How can I bear by myself the weight and burden of you
and your strife? 13[†] s Choose for your tribes wise, understanding, and
experienced men, and I will appoint them as your heads.’ 14And you
answered me, ‘The thing that you have spoken is good for us to do.’ 15So I
took the heads of your tribes, wise and experienced men, t and set them as
heads over you, commanders of thousands, commanders of hundreds,
commanders of fifties, commanders of tens, and officers, throughout your
tribes. 16[†]And I charged your judges at that time, ‘Hear the cases between
your brothers, and u judge righteously between a man and his brother or the
alien who is with him. 17 v You shall not be partial in judgment. You shall
hear the small and the great alike. You shall not be intimidated by anyone,
for w the judgment is God’s. And the case that is too hard for you, you shall
x bring to me, and I will hear it.’ 18And I commanded you at that time all the
things that you should do.
Israel’s Refusal to Enter the Land
19“Then we set out from Horeb and y went through all that great and
terrifying wilderness that you saw, on the way to the hill country of the
Amorites, as the LORD our God commanded us. And z we came to Kadesh-
barnea. 20[†]And I said to you, ‘You have come to the hill country of the
Amorites, which the LORD our God is giving us. 21See, the LORD your God
has set the land before you. Go up, take possession, as the LORD, the God of
your fathers, has told you. a Do not fear or be dismayed.’ 22Then all of you
came near me and said, ‘Let us send men before us, that they may explore
the land for us and bring us word again of the way by which we must go up
and the cities into which we shall come.’ 23[†]The thing seemed good to me,
and b I took twelve men from you, one man from each tribe. 24And c they
turned and went up into the hill country, and came to the Valley of Eshcol
and spied it out. 25And they took in their hands some of the fruit of the land
and brought it down to us, and brought us word again and said, ‘It is a good
land that the LORD our God is giving us.’
26“Yet you would not go up, but rebelled against the command of the
LORD your God. 27And d you murmured in your tents and said, ‘Because the
LORD e hated us he has brought us out of the land of Egypt, f to give us into
the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us. 28[†]Where are we going up? g Our
brothers have made our hearts melt, saying, h “The people are greater and
taller than we. The cities are great and fortified up to heaven. And besides,
we have seen i the sons of the Anakim there.”’ 29[†]Then I said to you, ‘Do
not be in dread or afraid of them. 30The LORD your God who goes before
you j will himself fight for you, just as he did for you in Egypt before your
eyes, 31and in the wilderness, where you have seen how the LORD your God
k carried you, as a man carries his son, all the way that you went until you
came to this place.’ 32[†]Yet in spite of this word l you did not believe the
LORD your God, 33 m who went before you in the way n to seek you out a
place to pitch your tents, in fire by night and in the cloud by day, to show
you by what way you should go.
The Penalty for Israel’s Rebellion
34“And the LORD heard your words and was angered, and he swore, 35
o ‘Not
one of these men of this evil generation shall see the good land that I swore
to give to your fathers, 36[†] p except Caleb the son of Jephunneh. He shall
see it, and to him and to his children I will give the land on which he has
trodden, because he has wholly followed the LORD!’ 37[†]Even with me
q the LORD was angry on your account and said, ‘You also shall not go in
there. 38 r Joshua the son of Nun, r who stands before you, he shall enter.
s Encourage him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it. 39[†]And as for t your
little ones, who you said would become a prey, and your children, who
today u have no knowledge of good or evil, they shall go in there. And to
them I will give it, and they shall possess it. 40But as for you, v turn, and
journey into the wilderness in the direction of the Red Sea.’
41“Then you answered me, w ‘We have sinned against the LORD. We
ourselves will go up and fight, just as the LORD our God commanded us.’
And every one of you fastened on his weapons of war and thought it easy to
go up into the hill country.
42[†]And the LORD said to me, x ‘Say to them,
Do not go up or fight, y for I am not in your midst, lest you be defeated
before your enemies.’ 43So I spoke to you, and you would not listen; but
you rebelled against the command of the LORD and z presumptuously went
up into the hill country.
44 a Then the Amorites who lived in that hill country
came out against you and chased you b as bees do and beat you down in
Seir as far as c Hormah. 45And you returned and wept before the LORD, but
the LORD did not listen to your voice or give ear to you. 46So d you
remained at Kadesh many days, the days that you remained there.
The Wilderness Years