DEUTERONOMY 25 [†]“If there is a a dispute between men and they come
into court and the judges decide between them, b acquitting the innocent
and condemning the guilty,
2then if the guilty man deserves to be beaten,
the judge shall cause him to lie down and be beaten in his presence with a
number of stripes in proportion to his offense. 3[†] c Forty stripes may be
given him, but not more, lest, if one should go on to beat him with more
stripes than these, your brother be degraded in your sight.
4[†] d “You shall not muzzle an ox when it is treading out the grain.
Laws Concerning Levirate Marriage
5[†] e “If brothers dwell together, and one of them dies and has no son, the
wife of the dead man shall not be married outside the family to a stranger.
Her f husband’s brother shall go in to her and take her as his wife and
perform the duty of a husband’s brother to her.
6And the first son whom she
bears shall succeed to the name of his dead brother, that g his name may not
be blotted out of Israel. 7[†]And if the man does not wish to take his
brother’s wife, then his brother’s wife shall h go up to the gate to the elders
and say, ‘My husband’s brother refuses to perpetuate his brother’s name in
Israel; he will not perform the duty of a husband’s brother to me.’ 8Then the
elders of his city shall call him and speak to him, and if he persists, saying,
i ‘I do not wish to take her,’ 9[†]then his brother’s wife shall go up to him in
the presence of the elders and j pull his sandal off his foot and k spit in his
face. And she shall answer and say, ‘So shall it be done to the man who
does not l build up his brother’s house.’ 10And the name of his house [1]
shall be called in Israel, ‘The house of him who had his sandal pulled off.’
Miscellaneous Laws
11“When men fight with one another and the wife of the one draws near to
rescue her husband from the hand of him who is beating him and puts out
her hand and seizes him by the private parts, 12then you shall cut off her
hand. m Your eye shall have no pity.
13[†]“You n shall not have in your bag two kinds of weights, a large and a
small. 14You shall not have in your house two kinds of measures, a large
and a small. 15A full and fair [2] weight you shall have, a full and fair
measure you shall have, o that your days may be long in the land that the
LORD your God is giving you. 16For p all who do such things, all who act
dishonestly, q are an abomination to the LORD your God.
17[†] r “Remember what Amalek did to you s on the way as you came out
of Egypt, 18how he attacked you on the way when you were faint and
weary, and t cut off your tail, those who were lagging behind you, and he
did not fear God. 19Therefore u when the LORD your God has given you rest
from all your enemies around you, in the land that the LORD your God is
giving you for an inheritance to possess, you shall v blot out the memory of
Amalek from under heaven; you shall not forget.
Offerings of Firstfruits and Tithes