DEUTERONOMY 2 [†]“Then we turned and journeyed into the wilderness in
the direction of the Red Sea, e as the LORD told me. And for many days we
traveled around Mount Seir.
2[†]Then the LORD said to me, 3‘You have been
traveling around this mountain country f long enough. Turn northward 4and
command the people, “You are about to pass through the territory of g your
brothers, the people of Esau, h who live in Seir; and i they will be afraid of
you. So be very careful. 5[†]Do not contend with them, for I will not give
you any of their land, no, not so much as for the sole of the foot to tread on,
because h I have given Mount Seir to Esau as a possession. 6[†] j You shall
purchase food from them with money, that you may eat, and you shall also
buy water from them with money, that you may drink. 7For the LORD your
God has blessed you in all the work of your hands. k He knows your going
through this great wilderness. l These forty years the LORD your God has
been with you. You have lacked nothing.”’ 8[†]So m we went on, away from
our brothers, the people of Esau, who live in Seir, away from n the Arabah
road from o Elath and p Ezion-geber.
“And we turned and went in the direction of the wilderness of Moab.
9[†]And the LORD said to me, q ‘Do not harass Moab or contend with them
in battle, for I will not give you any of their land for a possession, because I
have given r Ar to s the people of Lot for a possession.’ 10[†]( t The Emim
formerly lived there, u a people great and many, and tall v as the Anakim.
11Like the Anakim they are also counted as w Rephaim, but the Moabites
call them Emim. 12 x The Horites also lived in Seir formerly, but the people
of Esau dispossessed them and destroyed them from before them and settled
in their place, y as Israel did to the land of their possession, which the LORD
gave to them.) 13[†]‘Now rise up and go over z the brook Zered.’ So we
went over z the brook Zered. 14And the time from our leaving a Kadesh-
barnea until we crossed b the brook Zered was thirty-eight years, c until the
entire generation, that is, the men of war, had perished from the camp, as
the LORD had sworn to them. 15For indeed the hand of the LORD was against
them, to destroy them from the camp, until they had perished.
16“So as soon as all the men of war had perished and were dead from
among the people, 17the LORD said to me, 18‘Today you are to cross the
border of Moab at Ar.
19And when you approach the territory of the people
of Ammon, d do not harass them or contend with them, for I will not give
you any of the land of the people of Ammon as a possession, because I have
given it to e the sons of Lot for a possession.’ 20(It is also counted as a land
of f Rephaim. Rephaim formerly lived there—but the Ammonites call them
Zamzummim— 21
g a people great and many, and tall as the Anakim; but the
LORD destroyed them before the Ammonites, [1] and they dispossessed them
and settled in their place, 22as he did for the people of Esau, who live in
Seir, when he destroyed h the Horites before them and they dispossessed
them and settled in their place even to this day.
23As for i the Avvim, who
lived in villages as far as j Gaza, k the Caphtorim, who came from Caphtor,
destroyed them and settled in their place.) 24[†]‘Rise up, set out on your
journey and l go over the Valley of the Arnon. Behold, I have given into
your hand Sihon the Amorite, king of m Heshbon, and his land. Begin to
take possession, and n contend with him in battle. 25This day I will begin to
put o the dread and fear of you on the peoples who are under the whole
heaven, who shall hear the report of you and shall tremble and be in anguish
because of you.’
The Defeat of King Sihon
26[†]“So I sent messengers from the wilderness of p Kedemoth to Sihon the
king of m Heshbon, q with words of peace, saying, 27 r ‘Let me pass through
your land. I will go only by the road; I will turn aside neither to the right
nor to the left. 28 s You shall sell me food for money, that I may eat, and give
me water for money, that I may drink. Only let me pass through on foot,
29
t as the sons of Esau who live in Seir and the Moabites who live in Ar did
for me, until I go over the Jordan into the land that the LORD our God is
giving to us.’ 30[†]But u Sihon the king of m Heshbon would not let us pass
by him, for the LORD your God v hardened his spirit and made his heart
obstinate, that he might give him into your hand, as he is this day.
31And the
LORD said to me, ‘Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land over to
you. Begin to take possession, that you may occupy his land.’ 32[†]Then
w Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Jahaz. 33And
x the LORD our God gave him over to us, and y we defeated him and his
sons and all his people. 34[†]And we captured all his cities at that time and
devoted to destruction [2] every z city, men, women, and children. We left no
survivors. 35Only the livestock we took as spoil for ourselves, with the
plunder of the cities that we captured. 36 a From Aroer, which is on the edge
of the Valley of the Arnon, and from b the city that is in the valley, as far as
Gilead, there was not a city too high for us. c The LORD our God gave all
into our hands. 37Only to the land of the sons of Ammon you did not draw
near, that is, to all the banks of the river d Jabbok and the cities of the hill
country, whatever the LORD our God had forbidden us.
The Defeat of King Og