DEUTERONOMY 30 [†] h “And i when all these things come upon you, the
blessing and the curse, which I have set before you, and j you call them to
mind among all the nations where the LORD your God has driven you, 2and
k return to the LORD your God, you and your children, and obey his voice in
all that I command you today, with all your heart and with all your soul,
3then the LORD your God l will restore your fortunes and have mercy on
you, and he will m gather you again from all the peoples where the LORD
your God has scattered you. 4 n If your outcasts are in the uttermost parts of
heaven, from there the LORD your God will gather you, and from there he
will take you. 5And the LORD your God will bring you into the land that
your fathers possessed, that you may possess it. o And he will make you
more prosperous and numerous than your fathers. 6[†]And p the LORD your
God will circumcise your heart and the heart of your offspring, q so that you
will love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul, that
you may live. 7And the LORD your God will put all these curses on your
foes and enemies who persecuted you. 8And you shall again obey the voice
of the LORD and keep all his commandments that I command you today.
9[†] r The LORD your God will make you abundantly prosperous in all the
work of your hand, in the fruit of your womb and in the fruit of your cattle
and in the fruit of your ground. s For the LORD will again take delight in
prospering you, as he took delight in your fathers, 10when you obey the
voice of the LORD your God, to keep his commandments and his statutes
that are written in this Book of the Law, when you turn to the LORD your
God with all your heart and with all your soul.
The Choice of Life and Death
11[†]“For this commandment that I command you today t is not too hard for
you, neither is it far off. 12 u It is not in heaven, that you should say, ‘Who
will ascend to heaven for us and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do
it?’ 13Neither is it beyond the sea, that you should say, ‘Who will go over
the sea for us and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it?’ 14But the
word is very near you. It is in your mouth and in your heart, so that you can
do it.
15[†]“See, v I have set before you today life and good, death and evil. 16If
you obey the commandments of the LORD your God [1] that I command you
today, w by loving the LORD your God, by walking in his ways, and by
keeping his commandments and his statutes and his rules, [2] then you shall
live and multiply, and the LORD your God will bless you in the land that you
are entering to take possession of it. 17But if x your heart turns away, and
you will not hear, but are drawn away to worship other gods and serve
them, 18 y I declare to you today, that you shall surely perish. You shall not
live long in the land that you are going over the Jordan to enter and possess.
19[†]I call heaven and earth to witness against you today, that I have set
before you life and death, z blessing and curse. Therefore choose life, that
you and your offspring may live, 20loving the LORD your God, obeying his
voice a and holding fast to him, for b he is your life and length of days, that
you may dwell in c the land that the LORD swore to your fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.”
Joshua to Succeed Moses