ECCLESIASTES 3 [†]For everything there is a season, and l a time for every
matter under heaven:
2 a time to be born, and a time to m die;
a time to plant, and a time to pluck up what is planted;
3 a time to kill, and a time to heal;
a time to break down, and a time to build up;
4 a time to n weep, and a time to laugh;
a time to mourn, and a time to o dance;
5 a time to p cast away stones, and a time to q gather stones together;
a time to embrace, and a time to r refrain from embracing;
6[†] a time to seek, and a time to s lose;
a time to keep, and a time to t cast away;
7 a time to u tear, and a time to sew;
a time to v keep silence, and a time to speak;
8[†] a time to love, and a time to w hate;
a time for war, and a time for peace.
The God-Given Task
9[†]What x gain has the worker from his toil? 10I have seen y the business
that z God has given to the children of man to be busy with. 11[†]He has
a made everything beautiful in its time. Also, he has put eternity into man’s
heart, yet so that he cannot b find out what God has done from the
beginning to the end. 12[†]I perceived that there is c nothing better for them
than to be joyful and to d do good as long as they live; 13also e that
everyone should eat and drink and take pleasure in all his toil—this is
f God’s gift to man.
14[†]I perceived that whatever God does endures forever; g nothing can
be added to it, nor anything taken from it. God has done it, so that people
fear before him. 15That which is, h already has been; that which is to be,
already has been; and God i seeks what has been driven away. [1]
From Dust to Dust
16[†]Moreover, j I saw under the sun that in the place of justice, even k there
was wickedness, and in the place of righteousness, even there was
wickedness. 17I said in my heart, l God will judge the righteous and the
wicked, for there is m a time for every matter and for every work. 18[†]I said
in my heart with regard to the children of man that God is testing them that
they may see that they themselves are but n beasts. 19 o For what happens to
the children of man and what happens to the beasts is the same; as one dies,
so dies the other. They all have the same breath, and man has no advantage
over the beasts, for all is vanity. [2] 20All go to one place. All are from p the
dust, and to dust all return. 21[†]Who knows whether q the spirit of man
goes upward and the spirit of the beast goes down into the earth? 22So I saw
that there is r nothing better than that a man should rejoice in his work, for
s that is his lot. Who can bring him to see t what will be after him?
Evil Under the Sun
ECCLESIASTES 4 u Again I v saw all w the oppressions that are done under
the sun. And behold, the tears of the oppressed, and they had x no one to
comfort them! On the side of their oppressors there was power, and there
was no one to comfort them. 2[†]And I y thought the dead who are already
dead more fortunate than the living who are still alive. 3But z better than
both is he who has not yet been and has not seen the evil deeds that are
done under the sun.
4[†]Then I saw that all toil and all skill in work come from a man’s envy
of his neighbor. This also is a vanity [1] and a striving after wind.
5The fool b folds his hands and c eats his own flesh.
6 d Better is a handful of e quietness than two hands full of toil and a
striving after wind.
7[†] u Again, I saw vanity under the sun: 8one person who has no other,
either son or brother, yet there is no end to all his toil, and his f eyes are
never satisfied with riches, so that he never asks, g “For whom am I toiling
and depriving myself of pleasure?” This also is vanity and an unhappy
h business.
9Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their toil.
10For if they fall, one will lift up his fellow. But woe to him who is alone
when he falls and has not another to lift him up! 11Again, if two lie together,
they keep warm, i but how can one keep warm alone? 12[†]And though a
man might prevail against one who is alone, two will withstand him—a
threefold cord is not quickly broken.
13[†]Better was j a poor and wise youth than an old and foolish king who
no longer knew how k to take advice. 14For he went l from prison to the
throne, though in his own kingdom he had been born poor.
15I saw all the
living who move about under the sun, along with that [2] youth who was to
stand in the king’s [3] place. 16There was no end of all the people, all of
whom he led. Yet those who come later will not rejoice in him. Surely this
also is m vanity and a striving after wind.
Fear God