ECCLESIASTES 12 [†]Remember also your Creator in v the days of your
youth, before w the evil days come and the years draw near of which x you
will say, “I have no pleasure in them”; 2[†]before y the sun and the light and
the moon and the stars are darkened and the clouds return after the rain, 3in
the day when the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men are bent,
and the grinders cease because they are few, and z those who look through
the windows are dimmed, 4and a the doors on the street are shut—when
b the sound of the grinding is low, and one rises up at the sound of a bird,
and all c the daughters of song are brought low— 5they are afraid also of
what is high, and d terrors are in the way; the almond tree blossoms, the
grasshopper drags itself along, [1] and desire fails, because man is going to
his e eternal f home, and the g mourners go about the streets— 6before the
silver cord is snapped, or h the golden bowl is broken, or the pitcher is
i shattered at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern, 7and j the dust
returns to the earth as it was, and k the spirit returns to God l who gave it.
8[†] m Vanity [2] of vanities, says n the Preacher; all is vanity.
Fear God and Keep His Commandments
9Besides being wise, n the Preacher also taught the people knowledge,
weighing and studying and arranging o many proverbs with great care.
10 n The Preacher sought to find words of delight, and uprightly he wrote
words of truth.
11[†] p The words of the wise are like goads, and like q nails firmly fixed
are the collected sayings; they are r given by s one Shepherd. 12My son,
beware of anything beyond these. Of making u many books there is no end,
and v much study is a weariness of the flesh.
13[†]The end of the matter; all has been heard. w Fear God and keep his
commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. [3] 14For x God will bring
every deed into judgment, with [4] every secret thing, whether good or evil.
Study Notes for Ecclesiastes
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:1–3 Introduction and Theme. The speaker
introduces himself and his theme.
FACT
Ecclesiastes encourages God’s people to trust him in a fallen and often
confusing world, in which sin and heartache touch every corner of the
globe. We are to “fear God and keep his commandments” (12:13), even
when we cannot understand everything that is going on around us.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:2 vanity of vanities! All is vanity. This
important thematic word occurs frequently throughout the book. As the
book progresses, its meaning becomes clear (see Introduction: Key
Themes).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:3 What does man gain? This repeated question
(3:9; 5:15; compare 2:11) comes out of the Preacher’s realization that “all is
vanity.” If life frequently makes no sense and pleasures and achievements
are fleeting, is there any significance to human existence?
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:4–2:26 First Catalog of “Vanities.” The
Preacher gives specific examples to prove his belief that all is “vanity.”
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:11 There is no remembrance of former things,
nor . . . of later things. The writer-Preacher believes that few people have
any significant impact on the course of world history (see esv footnote).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:13 unhappy business. For some reason
unknown to the Preacher, God ordains that mankind should endure painful
experiences in this present fallen world. The phrase under heaven is
interchangeable with “under the sun” (v. 14, etc.).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:14 The Preacher examined everything under the
sun. However, he is unable to understand it all. He concludes that
everything is vanity and a striving after wind.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:15 Crooked here means “unknowable.” There
will always be aspects of life in a fallen world that remain mysterious.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:16 surpassing all who were over Jerusalem
before me. If anyone possessed the wisdom to grasp the meaning of life, it
was the Preacher.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:17 As part of his quest to know wisdom, the
Preacher also seeks to understand madness and folly. Apparently he
believes that he can better understand wisdom if he also understands its
opposite.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 1:18 Wisdom is a mixed blessing. In the process
of gaining wisdom one also gains a clearer view into the tragedies of life.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:1–2 Pleasure here apparently refers to activities
that can cause laughter.
FACT
The words vanity, vanities, and vain occur nearly 40 times in
Ecclesiastes. Their literal meaning is “vapor” or “breath,” so they are
used to describe things that can be fleeting or elusive, like the search for
meaning and purpose in life.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:3 The Preacher did not drink so much wine that
he lost his ability to think clearly. On his attempt to lay hold on folly, see
the note on 1:17.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:10–11 The Preacher finally realizes that his
work resulted in no permanent gain under the sun. Nevertheless, he did
receive a reward in return for his work: the pleasure that the work itself
gave him.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:12 The Preacher’s reign as king surpassed all
others. Anyone who comes after the king will at best only be able to copy
what has already been done.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:14–16 Wisdom is infinitely better than folly, but
the wise and the foolish both die. To make matters still worse, even the wise
are usually forgotten after their death.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:17 The limitations of wisdom lead the Preacher
to say that he hated life. Elsewhere he states that life is superior to death
and commends its enjoyment, so this statement does not reflect utter
despair. Rather, the Preacher “hates” life in the sense that he finds it deeply
disappointing in certain ways.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:18–20 I hated all my toil. While at times the
Preacher found pleasure in his work, his enjoyment is severely lessened by
the knowledge that he must eventually hand over his life’s work to someone
else. This causes him to despair that his life’s work will not amount to
anything significant.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 2:24–26 If a person does not believe his work will
have a lasting impact on the world, the best he can hope for is to find
enjoyment in toil and in God’s simple gifts of food and drink. Such
enjoyment is to be viewed as a gift from the hand of God.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:1–8 Poem: A Time for Everything. There is
an appropriate occasion for every human event or activity.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:6 a time to lose. To give up looking for a lost
item.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:8 a time to hate. Righteous anger is legitimate
under the appropriate circumstances.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:9–15 Fear God, the Sovereign One. The
vanity of life causes the Preacher to reflect on what is permanent and
lasting: the sovereign God of the universe.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:11 The Preacher can see that God has made
everything beautiful in its time. The problem is that God has also placed
eternity into man’s heart, yet so that he cannot find out what God has
done from the beginning to the end. God has given the Preacher a desire
to understand all of life, but God has also limited his ability to do so.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:12–13 Rather than becoming resentful about
what God has not granted human beings, one should enjoy the gifts that
God has given.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:14 The short-lived “vanities” of this world
reveal all the more clearly the enduring work of God, to which nothing can
be added.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:16–4:16 Second Catalog of “Vanities.” The
Preacher returns to examining more of life’s vanities.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:16–4:3 The fact that people die is a further
aspect of “vanity.”
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:16–17 The fall of mankind affects all human
relationships. One may suffer wickedness at the hand of other human
beings. But this can be endured if one understands that God will judge the
righteous and the wicked.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:18–19 The children of man . . . are but beasts
in the sense that both human beings and animals die.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 3:21 For the Preacher, the human spirit is a
mysterious thing. While he affirms that the spirit returns to God when a
person dies, he does not know how it comes to reside in the human body in
the first place.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 4:2–3 Some people’s circumstances are so tragic
that they welcome death. The Preacher considers those who have not yet
lived to be the most fortunate. This is because they have not yet seen the
evil deeds that are done under the sun.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 4:4–6 Much of what is achieved by human ability
stems from a man’s envy of his neighbor. Here the Preacher focuses on
the vanity that comes to those who make such striving their main goal in
life. On the other hand, if a man folds his hands and refuses to work, he
ruins himself.
FACT
Working too hard? It is equally wrong to be lazy or to be a “workaholic.”
People sometimes work too hard because they want all the nice things
their neighbors have (4:4). People should work diligently but should also
enjoy the quiet contentment that comes from serving the Lord (v. 6).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 4:7–11 Some people engage in endless toil yet are
never satisfied even though they acquire great riches. On the other hand
there are those who give up their jealous desires to always be the best; they
discover that two are better than one as they share their work load,
enjoying a good reward and finding help in hard times.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 4:12 A threefold cord stands for the great value of
being part of a larger group rather than being alone.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 4:13–16 The Preacher recalls an example of the
temporary results of wisdom. In contrast to an old and foolish king, there
once was a poor and wise youth who managed to rise above his humble
beginnings and ascend to the throne. Yet later generations would not
rejoice in him; his success and popularity, though gained by true wisdom,
did not last.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:1–7 Fear God, the Holy and Righteous
One. In this section, the encouragement to “fear God” is motivated by his
holy and righteous character (compare note on 3:9–15).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:4 People should keep their promises, or vows, to
God. By taking a vow, a worshiper would promise to perform a specific act
if God would respond favorably to a particular petition.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:8–7:24 Life “Under the Sun.” The Preacher
observes the hardships of life in a fallen world.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:8–9 The political maneuvering of sinful officials
results in suffering for the powerless.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:10–6:9 The Preacher observes the destructive
nature of greed and concludes that a life of contentment is much better
(compare Phil. 4:11; 1 Tim. 6:6, 8; Heb. 13:5).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:13–14 riches were kept . . . to his hurt. A man
endured hardship and sacrificed in order to acquire wealth but was never
able to enjoy it, because it was lost in a bad venture.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:17 The man’s selfish, fearful greed resulted in a
truly wretched life.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 5:20 he will not much remember . . . his life. The
one to whom God grants contentment focuses on blessings from God rather
than the darker realities of human existence.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 6:3–6 Long life and many children are among
earth’s greatest blessings, but a discontented heart will be unsatisfied even
with these.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 6:10–11 To “name” something is to exercise
authority over it. God is the one who has named all things, and therefore he
rules over all. It is foolish for mere mortals to dispute God’s sovereign
ordering of the world. To do so only produces more words and more
vanity.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 6:12 For who knows what is good for man?
Even the wisest humans cannot give absolutely correct advice based on a
certain knowledge of what will be.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:1 The verses that follow indicate that the day of
death refers not to one’s own passing but rather to experiencing the death
of another. Bereavement often increases spiritual wisdom more than the joy
one feels over a newborn child.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:7 Oppression refers here to blackmail.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:11–12 Wisdom is similar to money in that both
provide real protection against the misfortunes of life. Wisdom, however,
preserves the life of him who has it.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:15 Righteous and righteousness can refer to
being “right” or “just” in one’s cause. The Preacher has observed instances
in which a person who was technically in the right still lost his case.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:16–18 Be not overly righteous. One should not
always insist on being proved right in an argument. On the other hand, be
not overly wicked, neither be a fool. That is, one should also know when
to stand firm for a just cause.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:25–29 The Heart of the Problem: Sin. The
Preacher has made numerous references to human sinfulness. This short
section helps to explain how this sorry condition came about.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:27 “Find” is a key word in vv. 25–29. It means
“figure out” or “comprehend.”
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 7:28–29 One man . . . I found, but a woman . . .
I have not found. The Preacher is unable to “figure out” human beings. His
one firm conclusion is that God made man upright, but they have sought
out many schemes, that is, humans were not content to remain in their state
of righteousness but instead rebelled against God (see Genesis 3).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:1–12:7 More on Life “Under the Sun.” The
Preacher continues his observations on life in a fallen world. He gives
appropriate counsel for living wisely.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:1 Who is like . . . and who knows? True
wisdom is rare. If one possesses such wisdom, it is obvious to others.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:2 Keep the king’s command. The verb “keep”
here means “protect” or “keep watch over.” The king’s counselor should
restrain the king from making foolish decisions on account of his oath to
God.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:3 Be not hasty to go from his presence. When
a king gives an unwise command, his counselor should not necessarily
leave his service. At the same time, the counselor should not be so eager to
obey the king that he becomes involved in an evil cause.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:4–6 Given the power of kings, it takes a great
deal of courage to question the wisdom of the king’s decision. The wise
counselor, however, will find the proper time and the just way for doing
so.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:7–8 It is risky to offer correction to the king. But
the counselor should remember that no man has power to retain the
spirit, or power over the day of death. He should not let the king’s power
intimidate him into keeping quiet.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:10–13 The Preacher has already pointed out that
people do not always get what they deserve in this life (3:16; 4:1; 5:8). But
this does not mean that it makes no difference how one lives, for it will be
well with those who fear God.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:14–15 It is a puzzling vanity that the wicked
appear to escape judgment and receive blessings. It is equally puzzling that
the righteous sometimes receive the treatment the wicked deserve.
FACT
The peaceful shadows of old age. The righteous will enjoy a long and
peaceful old age, like the shadows of evening (8:13). There is no such
hope, however, for the wicked.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 8:17 True wisdom includes the humility to admit
that man cannot fully understand all of reality in a fallen world.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 9:1–6 No matter how difficult or humble a
person’s circumstances may be, those circumstances are to be preferred to
dying, because a living dog is better than a dead lion.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 9:7–10 When godly people find enjoyment in life,
they know that it is due to God’s “approval” or “favor” (v. 7; compare 2:24–
26; 3:13; 5:19–20).
FACT
“Eat, drink, and be merry”? Ecclesiastes advises those who serve God to
enjoy his gifts of food, drink, comfort, married life, and honest work
(9:7–9; compare 2:24–26; 3:13; 5:19–20).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 9:11–12 From the human perspective, many things
appear to be the result of pure chance.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 9:13–18 Wisdom can achieve much good and is
worth pursuing. Yet its benefits can be undone by evil.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 9:13–16 The Preacher gives an example of
wisdom’s ability to produce a remarkable victory. Even when such wisdom
is forgotten or despised, it is still to be valued over earthly might.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 9:17–18 Just as one wise man can successfully
overcome the worst odds, so also one sinner destroys much good.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 10:2 The “right hand” is often associated with
strength in the OT. The Preacher is probably referring to the left to indicate
weakness.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 10:6–7 The Preacher is aware that the poor can
possess wisdom and that the wealthy ruling classes can be corrupt.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 10:8–12 The various disasters described in vv. 8–
11 are all accidental, so the one who digs a pit is not necessarily intending
to cause harm.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 10:14 The fact that no man knows what is to be
does not prevent a fool from making many unsupported predictions.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 10:15 A fool’s toil in the fields is more tiring than
others’ because he is unaware of things that would make his work easier.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 10:19 Bread . . . wine . . . money. The Preacher
comments favorably here on each of these. Money answers everything in
that it can influence a situation to produce the result one desires.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 11:1 Cast your bread upon the waters is a
difficult expression. Various scholars have suggested it could refer to (1)
maritime commerce; (2) diversifying one’s financial resources; (3) giving to
the poor.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 11:2 It is wise to have many ways to make a living
and invest resources.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 11:4 Too much time spent trying to “read the
skies” will only distract one from the work that needs to be done. Those
who always wait for the perfect time to begin a project will not sow and
will not reap.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 11:7–8 Light . . . darkness refers to the contrast
between life and death.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 11:9 Proper enjoyment of life is possible only
within the moral boundaries established by God. He will evaluate all human
deeds according to his righteous judgment.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 11:10 Remove vexation . . . put away pain. It is
not wise to dwell on sorrow or illness.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 12:1 Evil days refers to the physical weakening of
old age.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 12:2–7 This section is a symbolic picture of aging
and death. The common link between most of the images used in v. 6
appears to be that they are water receptacles: since water is a symbol of life,
the destruction of these items indicates the moment when life ceases and
the spirit returns to God who gave it (see note on 3:21).
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 12:8–14 Final Conclusion and Epilogue. The
Preacher restates his claim that all is “vanity.” The epilogue affirms the
wisdom of the Preacher, summons the reader to pay careful attention to the
words of the wise, and summarizes the overall message of the book.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 12:11 A goad is a long stick used for guiding oxen
while plowing. The words of the wise provide moral and intellectual
stability like nails firmly fixed. Ultimately, such wisdom is given by one
Shepherd, God.
ECCLESIASTES—NOTE ON 12:13–14 The Preacher has already pointed out the
need to fear God (see note on 5:1–7) and to keep his commandments
(compare 5:4–6; 7:17–18). The whole duty of man thus involves genuine
faith in God, as well as good works, which are the inevitable result of true
faith (see James 2:14). God will bring every deed into judgment
(compare Eccles. 11:9), thus it is important to obey his commands.
Song of Solomon
(return to table of contents)
Song of Solomon 1 • Song of Solomon 2 • Song of Solomon 3
Song of Solomon 4 • Song of Solomon 5 • Song of Solomon 6
Song of Solomon 7 • Song of Solomon 8
Introduction to Song of Solomon
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Interpreting Literary Images
Structure
Key Themes
Outline
Global Message of Song of Solomon
God’s Glorious Design in Marriage and Sexuality
The World’s Broken Sexuality
The Global Church’s Witness in Sexuality
Our Witness to the World regarding Sexuality
Study Notes
•
•
Introduction to The Song of Solomon
Introduction to The Song of Solomon
Timeline
Author and Date
The wording of the first verse in Song of Solomon (or Song of Songs; 1:1)
does not necessarily mean that Solomon wrote the book. It may have been
written by Solomon himself, or it could have been written in his honor.
When he is mentioned (1:5; 3:7, 9, 11; 8:11–12), it is generally as a distant,
even idealized figure. What is known about Solomon suggests that he
probably was not the writer himself (1 Kings 3:1; 11:1–8). However, the
book was probably composed during Solomon’s time, perhaps under his
oversight, between c. 960 and 931 B.C.
Theme
The Song of Solomon contains beautiful poetry expressing romantic love
between a young man and a young woman in ancient Israel. He is a
shepherd (1:7) and she is a shepherdess (1:8). They are looking forward to
their marriage and the pleasure it will bring.
Interpreting Literary Images
The Song of Solomon includes several extravagant comparisons. For
example, the woman is compared to a horse in Pharaoh’s court (1:9), and
her hair is compared to a flock of goats (4:1). It is helpful to remember that
(1) the comparisons are figurative rather than literal, and (2) what the
person has in common with what he or she is compared with is a certain
quality, usually the quality of excellence, or of being the best of its kind.
Structure
The author has presented the Song of Solomon as a series of exchanges,
mostly between the shepherdess and the shepherd, with the chorus-like
“others” sprinkled in. These others usually pick up items from the lovers’
speeches and urge the two forward in love. There is also a refrain, “I adjure
you, O daughters of Jerusalem, . . . that you not stir up or awaken love until
it pleases” (2:7; 3:5; 8:4; variation in 5:8), spoken by the shepherdess. This
is understood as her urging the other women not to push this love too fast,
in order to let it reach its consummation at the right time (the marriage bed,
which seems to begin in 8:5).
Key Themes
1. God’s law commands sexual purity. Marriage provides the right
framework within which his people may properly enjoy the gift of
sexual intimacy (see Gen. 2:23–24). Thus God’s people honor him and
commend him to the world when they demonstrate with their lives that
obedience in such matters brings genuine delight.
2. Marriage is a gift of God, and is to be founded on loyalty and
commitment (see Gen. 2:24, “hold fast”), which allows delight to
flourish. As such, it is a fitting image for God’s relationship with his
people.
Outline
I. Title: The Best of Songs (1:1)
II. The Lovers Yearn for Each Other (1:2–2:17)
III. The Shepherdess Dreams (3:1–6:3)
IV . The Lovers Yearn for Each Other Again (6:4–8:4)
V . The Lovers Join in Marriage (8:5–14)
The Global Message of The Song of
Solomon
The Song of Solomon paints a beautifully passionate, pure, and even
provocative picture of marriage and sexuality. It may seem remarkable, to
Christians and nonbelievers alike, that such a book is a part of the biblical
canon. And how different Scripture would be without this book! What, then,
is the global message of the Song of Solomon? What message does the
universal church need to hear from its pages?
God’s Glorious Design in Marriage and Sexuality
Sexuality was God’ s idea. Human sexuality is one of God’s most marvelous
and blessed ideas. God is not boring, prudish, or ashamed of sex. To make
the mating procedure whereby procreation takes place an experience of
intense attraction, intense bonding, and intense pleasure was his idea! The
beauty of human sexuality is expressed thoroughly and without hesitation in
the Song of Solomon. The very first words of the young maiden express her
intense desire for her beloved: “Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth!” (Song 1:2). There is a refreshing freedom, joy, and delight
expressed by the couple in their passionate mutual admiration (1:9–10, 12–
16; 2:9, 14; 4:1–15; 5:10–16; 6:5–10; 7:1–9), their intense sexual longing
for marriage (1:2–2:17; 7:11–8:3), and the final and wonderful
consummation of their marriage bond.
God’ s gift to all humanity. The command to become one flesh pre-dates
the fall (Gen. 1:28). Sex was not a concession to sinful mankind. It was a
blessed provision and gift from God for humanity to enjoy. It is a gift of
common grace.
God’ s design for sexuality. God designed sex to be enjoyed within the
marriage context. The repeated admonition not to “stir up or awaken love
until it pleases” emphasizes that there is a right and a wrong time for sex
(see Song 2:7; 3:5; 8:4). Scripture strongly forbids the improper use and
context of sex. For example, sex outside of marriage, or with someone other
than one’s spouse, or with someone of the same sex are explicitly prohibited
(Lev. 18:22; Prov. 5:20–23; 1 Cor. 6:9). Yet Scripture just as strongly
commends the full enjoyment of sex within the God-ordained context of
marriage (Prov. 5:15–19; 1 Cor. 7:3). Such sexual enjoyment between a
husband and wife is a blessed expression of lifelong commitment and
mutual delight. There is joyful celebration of the beauty of creation in the
human body in all its features and distinctiveness. There is a wonder and
glory in God’s creation of male and female, and the beauty of each gender
complements the other. There is freedom and security found in unrivaled,
exclusive, passionate, and lifelong commitment.
The Song of Solomon is refreshingly honest in acknowledging that
waiting for love and not misusing sexuality are difficult. Sexual longing is
not wrong, but sexual enjoyment before marriage defiles God’s design.
Though sexual desire is great, sexual enjoyment must be waited for and
enjoyed in God’s proper timing and design.
The World’s Broken Sexuality
This is a message that our world needs to hear. One of the most painful
expressions of the fall of mankind in our world today is in the area of
sexuality. Sexuality is broadly misunderstood, misused, and abused. While
various cultures and each generation offer varied and supposedly
“progressive” perspectives on sexuality, God’s view is timeless.
We live in a fallen world in need of a Savior. Marital conflict, divorce,
sexual immorality, and sexual abuse teach us of the painful impact of sin
and each person’s desperate need for a Savior. The Internet has radically
transformed the nature of pornography, now that it is almost universally
accessible. Around the world there is an unprecedented amount of
trafficking in human beings, a large proportion of whom are exploited and
abused in the sex industry. Such abuse of men, women, and even children,
all of whom are made in God’s image and have inherent dignity, is wicked.
Indeed, it is one of the most God-offending, pervasive, and evil forms of
wrongful sexuality in our world today.
The Global Church’s Witness in Sexuality
Through Christ, God’s design for humanity in all its fullness is being
restored and renewed. The Song of Solomon presents a picture of God-
honoring sexual delight that is one expression of the blessed life that we
have in Christ and his glorious redemption.
Christians, however, have often been among those who have
misunderstood or misused sexuality. Some have taught or have been taught
to be ashamed of sex. To lack joy and delight in the gift of sexuality within
marriage is to miss God’s perfect design and provision. There is also
brokenness in the global church because of failing marriages, adultery, and
sexual abuse. Such sexual abuse has stained not only the church but also its
leaders.
There is a need for discussion and teaching about sexuality within the
church. This is utterly countercultural in some societies, where sex is not
something openly discussed. Whatever its cultural situation, however, the
church must take up its responsibility to teach about such topics rather than
allowing its people to learn about sexuality from secular society.
Discussion and teaching about issues of sexuality should be forthright but
also appropriately modest. It requires cultural sensitivity and biblical
wisdom. The content of such teachings and discussions will likely challenge
cultural norms. In addition to such discussion there is need for repentance,
gospel renewal, mentoring, and encouragement.
Our Witness to the World regarding Sexuality
The area of sexuality and the beautiful picture presented in the Song of
Solomon are opportunities to share with the world the blessed “otherness,”
the holiness and beauty, of the Christian faith.
The original meaning of the word “martyr” is “witness.” This word was
used in the early days of Christianity not merely for those who suffered
death for the faith; it was more broadly applied to every Christian’s
privilege to bear witness to Christ and the Christian faith, whether in life or
death. As witnesses, Christians have the tremendous opportunity to share
and to show to the world the power of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the
glorious vision of a life renewed in the gospel. Such witness can be
displayed to the world in each sphere of life—in finances, work, family,
leisure, study, and even in sexuality.
Christians should have more accurate things to say about sex and a more
rightful enjoyment of sex than anyone. This is a part of our living and
visible witness to the world—that God and God’s ways are right and
righteous and joy-filled. The enjoyment and the jealous protection of love
are “flashes of fire, the very flame of the LORD” (Song 8:6). Through Christ,
God is jealously and graciously restoring humanity. A part of that
restoration is in the blessed enjoyment of and witness to God’s wonderful
gift of sexuality.