ECCLESIASTES 2 [†]I x said in my heart, “Come now, I will test you with
pleasure; enjoy yourself.” But behold, this also was vanity. [1] 2I y said of
laughter, “It is mad,” and of pleasure, “What use is it?” 3[†]I z searched with
my heart how to cheer my body with wine—my heart still guiding me with
wisdom—and how to lay hold on a folly, till I might see what was good for
the children of man to do under heaven during the few days of their life. 4I
made great works. I b built houses and planted c vineyards for myself. 5I
made myself d gardens and parks, and planted in them all kinds of fruit
trees. 6I made myself pools from which to water the forest of growing trees.
7I bought male and female slaves, and had e slaves who were born in my
house. I had also great possessions of f herds and flocks, more than any who
had been before me in Jerusalem. 8I also gathered for myself silver and
g gold and the treasure of h kings and i provinces. I got j singers, both men
and women, and many k concubines, [2] the delight of the sons of man.
9So I became great and l surpassed all who were before me in Jerusalem.
Also my l wisdom remained with me. 10[†]And whatever my eyes desired I
did not keep from them. I kept my heart from no pleasure, for my heart
m found pleasure in all my toil, and this was my n reward for all my toil.
11Then I considered all that my hands had done and the toil I had expended
in doing it, and behold, all was o vanity and a striving after wind, and there
was nothing p to be gained under the sun.
The Vanity of Living Wisely
12[†] q So I turned to consider r wisdom and madness and folly. For what
can the man do who comes after the king? Only s what has already been
done. 13Then I saw that there is more gain in wisdom than in folly, as there
is more gain in light than in darkness. 14[†] t The wise person has his eyes in
his head, but the fool walks in darkness. And yet I perceived that the u same
event happens to all of them. 15Then I said in my heart, v “What happens to
the fool will happen to me also. Why then have I been so very wise?” And I
said in my heart that this also is vanity.
16For of the wise as of the fool there
is w no enduring remembrance, seeing that in the days to come all will have
been long forgotten. x How the wise dies just like the fool! 17[†]So I hated
life, because what is done under the sun was grievous to me, for o all is
vanity and a striving after wind.
The Vanity of Toil
18[†]I hated y all my toil in which I toil under the sun, seeing that I must
z leave it to the man who will come after me, 19and who knows whether he
will be wise or a fool? Yet he will be master of all for which I toiled and
used my wisdom under the sun. This also is vanity.
20So I a turned about
and gave my heart up to despair b over all the toil of my labors under the
sun, 21because sometimes a person who has toiled with wisdom and
knowledge and skill must leave everything to be enjoyed by someone who
did not toil for it. This also is vanity and a great evil. 22What has a man
from c all the toil and striving of heart with which he toils beneath the sun?
23For d all his days are full of sorrow, and his e work is a vexation. Even in
the night his heart does not rest. This also is vanity.
24[†] f There is nothing better for a person than that he should g eat and
drink and find enjoyment [3] in his toil. This also, I saw, is h from the hand
of God, 25for apart from him [4] who can eat or who can have enjoyment?
26For to the one who pleases him i God has given wisdom and knowledge
and joy, but to the sinner he has given e the business of gathering and
collecting, j only to give to one who pleases God. k This also is vanity and a
striving after wind.
A Time for Everything