ECCLESIASTES 9 [†]But all this I laid to heart, examining it all, c how the
righteous and the wise and their deeds are d in the hand of God. Whether it
is love or hate, man does not know; both are before him. 2
e It is the same
for all, since f the same event happens to the righteous and the wicked, to
the good and the evil, [1] to the clean and the unclean, to him who sacrifices
and him who does not sacrifice. As the good one is, so is the sinner, and he
who g swears is as he who shuns an oath. 3This is an evil in all that is done
under the sun, that e the same event happens to all. Also, the hearts of the
children of man are full of evil, and h madness is in their hearts while they
live, and after that they go to the dead. 4But he who is joined with all the
living has hope, for a living dog is better than a dead lion. 5For the living
know that they will die, but i the dead know nothing, and they have no more
reward, for j the memory of them is forgotten. 6Their love and their hate
and their envy have already perished, and forever they have no more share
in all that is done under the sun.
Enjoy Life with the One You Love
7[†]Go, k eat your bread with joy, and drink your wine with a merry heart,
for God has already approved what you do.
8
l Let your garments be always white. Let not m oil be lacking on your
head.
9Enjoy life with the wife whom you love, all the days of your n vain [2]
life that he has given you under the sun, because that is your o portion in
life and in your toil at which you toil under the sun. 10Whatever your hand
finds to do, p do it with your might, [3] q for there is no work or thought or
knowledge or wisdom in Sheol, to which you are going.
Wisdom Better than Folly
11[†] r Again I saw that under the sun s the race is not to the swift, nor t the
battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor riches to the intelligent, nor
favor to those with knowledge, but time and u chance v happen to them all.
12For man w does not know his time. Like fish that are taken in an evil net,
and x like birds that are caught in a snare, so the children of man are
y snared at an evil time, when it suddenly falls upon them.
13[†]I have also seen this example of wisdom under the sun, and it
seemed great to me. 14There was a little city with few men in it, and a great
king came against it and besieged it, building great siegeworks against it.
15But there was found in it z a poor, wise man, and he by his a wisdom
delivered the city. Yet no one remembered that poor man. 16But I say that
b wisdom is better than might, though c the poor man’s wisdom is despised
and his words are not heard.
17[†]The words of the wise heard in d quiet are better than the shouting of
a ruler among fools. 18 e Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but f one
sinner destroys much good.
ECCLESIASTES 10 Dead flies make g the perfumer’s ointment give off a
stench;
so a little folly outweighs wisdom and honor.
2[†] h A wise man’s heart inclines him to the right,
but a fool’s heart to the left.
3 Even when the fool walks on the road, he lacks sense,
and he i says to everyone that he is a fool.
4 If the anger of the ruler rises against you, j do not leave your place,
k for calmness [1] will lay great offenses to rest.
5There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, as it were l an error
proceeding from the ruler: 6[†] m folly is set in many high places, and the
rich sit in a low place. 7
n I have seen slaves o on horses, and princes
walking on the ground like slaves.
8[†] He who p digs a pit will fall into it,
and q a serpent will bite him who breaks through a wall.
9 r He who quarries stones is hurt by them,
and he who s splits logs is endangered by them.
10 If the iron is blunt, and one does not sharpen the edge,
he must use more strength,
but wisdom helps one to succeed. [2]
11 If the serpent bites before it is t charmed,
there is no advantage to the charmer.
12 The words of a wise man’s mouth u win him favor, [3]
but v the lips of a fool consume him.
13 The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness,
and the end of his talk is evil madness.
14[†] w A fool multiplies words,
though no man knows what is to be,
and who can tell him x what will be after him?
15[†] The toil of a fool wearies him,
for he does not know y the way to the city.
16 z Woe to you, O land, when your king is a child,
and your princes feast in the morning!
17 Happy are you, O land, when your king is the son of the nobility,
and your princes feast at the proper time,
for strength, and not for a drunkenness!
18 Through sloth the roof sinks in,
and through indolence the house leaks.
19[†] Bread is made for laughter,
and b wine gladdens life,
and c money answers everything.
20 Even in your thoughts, d do not curse the king,
nor in your e bedroom curse the rich,
for a bird of the air will carry your voice,
or some winged creature tell the matter.
Cast Your Bread upon the Waters