ESTHER 6 [†]On that night the king could not sleep. And he gave orders to
bring o the book of memorable deeds, the chronicles, and they were read
before the king. 2And it was found written how p Mordecai had told about
q Bigthana [1] and r Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs, who guarded the
threshold, and who had sought to lay hands on King Ahasuerus. 3And the
king said, “What honor or distinction has been bestowed on Mordecai for
this?” The king’s young men who attended him said, “Nothing has been
done for him.” 4And the king said, “Who is in the court?” Now Haman had
just entered s the outer court of the king’s palace to speak to the king about
having Mordecai hanged on t the gallows [2] that he had prepared for him.
5[†]And the king’s young men told him, “Haman is there, standing in the
court.” And the king said, “Let him come in.” 6[†]So Haman came in, and
the king said to him, “What should be done to the man u whom the king
delights to honor?” And Haman said to himself, “Whom would the king
delight to honor more than me?” 7And Haman said to the king, “For the
man whom the king delights to honor,
8let royal robes be brought, which the
king has worn, v and the horse that the king has ridden, and on whose head
w a royal crown [3] is set. 9And let the robes and the horse be handed over to
one of the king’s most noble officials. Let them dress the man whom the
king delights to honor, and let them lead him on the horse through the
square of the city, x proclaiming before him: ‘Thus shall it be done to the
man whom the king delights to honor.’” 10Then the king said to Haman,
“Hurry; take the robes and the horse, as you have said, and do so to
Mordecai the Jew, who sits y at the king’s gate. Leave out nothing that you
have mentioned.” 11So Haman took the robes and the horse, and he dressed
Mordecai and led him through the square of the city, proclaiming before
him, “Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honor.”
12Then Mordecai returned to the king’s gate. But Haman hurried to his
house, mourning z and with his head covered. 13[†]And Haman told a his
wife Zeresh and all his friends everything that had happened to him. Then
his wise men and his wife Zeresh said to him, “If Mordecai, before whom
you have begun to fall, is of the Jewish people, you will not overcome him
but will surely fall before him.”
Esther Reveals Haman’s Plot
14While they were yet talking with him, the king’s eunuchs arrived and
hurried to bring Haman b to the feast that Esther had prepared.
ESTHER 7 So the king and Haman went in to feast with Queen Esther.
2[†]And on the second day, as they were drinking wine after the feast, the
king again said to Esther, c “What is your wish, Queen Esther? It shall be
granted you. And what is your request? d Even to the half of my kingdom, it
shall be fulfilled.” 3Then Queen Esther answered, e “If I have found favor
in your sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be granted me for
my wish, and my people for my request. 4[†] f For we have been sold, I and
my people, g to be destroyed, to be killed, and to be annihilated. If we had
been sold merely as slaves, men and women, I would have been silent, for
our affliction is not to be compared with the loss to the king.” 5Then King
Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther, “Who is he, and where is he, who has
dared [1] to do this?” 6And Esther said, h “A foe and enemy! This wicked
Haman!” Then Haman was terrified before the king and the queen.
Haman Is Hanged
7[†]And the king arose in his wrath from the wine-drinking and went into
i the palace garden, but Haman stayed to beg for his life from Queen Esther,
for he saw that harm was determined against him by the king. 8[†]And the
king returned from i the palace garden to the place where they were
drinking wine, as Haman was falling on j the couch where Esther was. And
the king said, “Will he even assault the queen in my presence, in my own
house?” As the word left the mouth of the king, they covered Haman’s face.
9Then k Harbona, one of the eunuchs in attendance on the king, said,
“Moreover, l the gallows [2] that Haman has prepared for Mordecai,
m whose word saved the king, is standing at Haman’s house, fifty cubits [3]
high.” 10And the king said, “Hang him on that.” n So they hanged Haman
on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. o Then the wrath of the
king abated.
Esther Saves the Jews