ESTHER 8 [†]On that day King Ahasuerus gave to Queen Esther the house
of Haman, h the enemy of the Jews. And Mordecai came before the king,
for Esther had told p what he was to her.
2 q And the king took off his signet
ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai. And Esther
set Mordecai over the house of Haman.
3[†]Then Esther spoke again to the king. She fell at his feet and wept and
pleaded with him to avert the evil plan of Haman r the Agagite and the plot
that he had devised against the Jews. 4 s When the king held out the golden
scepter to Esther,
5Esther rose and stood before the king. And she said, “If it
please the king, t and if I have found favor in his sight, and if the thing
seems right before the king, and I am pleasing in his eyes, let an order be
written to revoke u the letters devised by Haman r the Agagite, the son of
Hammedatha, which he wrote to destroy the Jews who are in all the
provinces of the king. 6For how can I bear v to see the calamity that is
coming to my people? Or how can I bear to see the destruction of my
kindred?” 7Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther and to Mordecai the
Jew, “Behold, w I have given Esther the house of Haman, and they have
hanged him on the gallows, [1] because he intended to lay hands on the
Jews. 8But you may write as you please with regard to the Jews, in the
name of the king, x and seal it with the king’s ring, for an edict written in
the name of the king and sealed with the king’s ring y cannot be revoked.”
9[†] z The king’s scribes were summoned at that time, in the third month,
which is the month of Sivan, on the twenty-third day. And an edict was
written, according to all that Mordecai commanded concerning the Jews, to
a the satraps and the governors and the officials of the provinces b from
India to Ethiopia, b 127 provinces, c to each province in its own script and
to each people in its own language, and also to the Jews in their script and
their language. 10 d And he wrote in the name of King Ahasuerus e and
sealed it with the king’s signet ring. Then he sent the letters by mounted
couriers riding on f swift horses that were used in the king’s service, bred
from the royal stud, 11[†]saying that the king allowed the Jews who were in
every city g to gather and defend their lives, h to destroy, to kill, and to
annihilate any armed force of any people or province that might attack
them, children and women included, i and to plunder their goods, 12[†] j on
one day throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, on the thirteenth
day of the twelfth month, which is the month of Adar.
13
k A copy of what
was written was to be issued as a decree in every province, being publicly
displayed to all peoples, and the Jews were to be ready on that day to take
vengeance on their enemies. 14So the couriers, mounted on their f swift
horses that were used in the king’s service, rode out hurriedly, urged by the
king’s command. And the decree was issued in Susa the citadel.
15[†]Then Mordecai went out from the presence of the king l in royal
robes of blue and white, with a great golden crown [2] and m a robe of fine
linen and purple, n and the city of Susa shouted and rejoiced. 16The Jews
had o light and gladness and joy and honor.
17[†]And in every province and
in every city, wherever the king’s command and his edict reached, there was
gladness and joy among the Jews, a feast and p a holiday. q And many from
the peoples of the country declared themselves Jews, r for fear of the Jews
had fallen on them.
The Jews Destroy Their Enemies