EXODUS 24 [†]Then he said to Moses, “Come up to the LORD, you and
Aaron, u Nadab, and Abihu, and v seventy of the elders of Israel, and
worship from afar.
2Moses w alone shall come near to the LORD, but the
others shall not come near, and the people shall not come up with him.”
3Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD and x all the
rules. [1] And all the people answered with one voice and said, y “All the
words that the LORD has spoken we will do.” 4[†]And z Moses wrote down
all the words of the LORD. He rose early in the morning and built an altar at
the foot of the mountain, and twelve a pillars, according to the twelve tribes
of Israel. 5[†]And he sent young men of the people of Israel, who offered
burnt offerings and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen to the LORD.
6[†]And
b Moses took half of the blood and put it in basins, and half of the blood he
threw against the altar.
7[†]Then he took the Book of the Covenant and read
it in the hearing of the people. And they said, x “All that the LORD has
spoken we will do, and we will be obedient.” 8
c And Moses took the blood
and threw it on the people and said, “Behold the blood of the covenant that
the LORD has made with you in accordance with all these words.”
9[†]Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and d seventy of the
elders of Israel e went up, 10and they f saw the God of Israel. There was
under his feet as it were a pavement of g sapphire stone, like the very
heaven for clearness. 11And he did not lay his hand on the chief men of the
people of Israel; they beheld God, and h ate and drank.
12The LORD said to Moses, i “Come up to me on the mountain and wait
there, that I may give you the j tablets of stone, with the law and the
commandment, which I have written for their instruction.” 13[†]So Moses
rose with his assistant k Joshua, and Moses went up l into the mountain of
God. 14And he said to the elders, “Wait here for us until we return to you.
And behold, Aaron and m Hur are with you. Whoever has a dispute, let him
go to them.”
15Then Moses went up on the mountain, and n the cloud covered the
mountain. 16 o The glory of the LORD dwelt on Mount Sinai, and the cloud
covered it six days. And on the seventh day he called to Moses out of the
midst of the cloud. 17[†]Now the appearance of the glory of the LORD was
like a p devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the sight of the people
of Israel. 18Moses entered the cloud and went up on the mountain. And
Moses q was on the mountain forty days and forty nights.
Contributions for the Sanctuary