EXODUS 15 [†]Then Moses and the people of Israel f sang this song to the
LORD, saying,
g “I will sing to the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously;
the horse and his rider [1] he has thrown into the sea.
2[†] h The LORD is my strength and my i song,
and he has become j my salvation;
this is my God, and I will praise him,
k my father’s God, and l I will exalt him.
3 The LORD is m a man of war;
n the LORD is his name.
4[†] o “Pharaoh’s chariots and his host he cast into the sea,
and his chosen p officers were sunk in the Red Sea.
5 The q floods covered them;
they r went down into the depths like a stone.
6[†] s Your right hand, O LORD, glorious in power,
your right hand, O LORD, t shatters the enemy.
7 In the u greatness of your majesty you overthrow your adversaries;
you send out your fury; it v consumes them like stubble.
8 At the w blast of your nostrils the waters piled up;
the x floods stood up in a heap;
the deeps congealed in the heart of the sea.
9[†] The enemy said, y ‘I will pursue, I will overtake,
I z will divide the spoil, my desire shall have its fill of them.
I will draw my sword; my hand shall destroy them.’
10 You a blew with your wind; the b sea covered them;
they sank like lead in the mighty waters.
11 c “Who is like you, O LORD, among the gods?
Who is like you, majestic in holiness,
awesome in d glorious deeds, e doing wonders?
12 You stretched out f your right hand;
the earth swallowed them.
13[†] “You have g led in your steadfast love the people whom h you have
redeemed;
you have i guided them by your strength to your holy abode.
14 j The peoples have heard; they tremble;
pangs have seized the inhabitants of Philistia.
15 Now are the chiefs of Edom k dismayed;
trembling seizes the leaders of l Moab;
m all the inhabitants of Canaan have melted away.
16[†] Terror and n dread fall upon them;
because of the greatness of your arm, they are still o as a stone,
till your people, O LORD, pass by,
till the people pass by whom p you have purchased.
17 You will bring them in and q plant them on your own mountain,
the place, O LORD, which you have made for your abode,
r the sanctuary, O Lord, which your hands have established.
18 s The LORD will reign forever and ever.”
19For when t the horses of Pharaoh with his chariots and his horsemen
went into the sea, u the LORD brought back the waters of the sea upon them,
but the people of Israel walked on dry ground in the midst of the sea.
20Then v Miriam w the prophetess, the x sister of Aaron, took a tambourine
in her hand, and y all the women went out after her with tambourines and
dancing. 21And Miriam sang to them:
z “Sing to the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously;
the horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea.”
Bitter Water Made Sweet
22[†]Then Moses made Israel set out from the Red Sea, and they went into
the wilderness of a Shur. They went three days in the wilderness and found
no water.
23When they came to b Marah, they could not drink the water of
Marah because it was bitter; therefore it was named Marah. [2] 24[†]And the
people c grumbled against Moses, saying, “What shall we drink?” 25[†]And
he d cried to the LORD, and the LORD showed him a log, [3] and he e threw it
into the water, and the water became sweet.
There the LORD [4] made for them a statute and a rule, and there he
f tested them, 26saying, g “If you will diligently listen to the voice of the
LORD your God, and do that which is right in his eyes, and give ear to his
commandments and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the h diseases on
you that I put on the Egyptians, for I am the LORD, i your healer.”
27[†]Then j they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water
and seventy palm trees, and they encamped there by the water.
Bread from Heaven
EXODUS 16 They k set out from Elim, and all the congregation of the people
of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on
the fifteenth day of the second month after they had departed from the land
of Egypt. 2[†]And the whole congregation of the people of Israel l grumbled
against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness, 3[†]and the people of Israel said
to them, m “Would that we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of
Egypt, n when we sat by the meat pots and ate bread to the full, for you
have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with
hunger.”
4[†]Then the LORD said to Moses, “Behold, I am about to rain o bread
from heaven for you, and the people shall go out and gather a day’s portion
every day, that I may p test them, whether they will walk in my law or not.
5On the sixth day, when they prepare what they bring in, q it will be twice
as much as they gather daily.” 6So Moses and Aaron said to all the people of
Israel, r “At evening s you shall know that it was the LORD who brought you
out of the land of Egypt, 7[†]and in the morning you shall see the t glory of
the LORD, because he has heard your grumbling against the LORD. For
u what are we, that you grumble against us?” 8And Moses said, “When the
LORD gives you in the evening meat to eat and in the morning bread to the
full, because the LORD has heard your grumbling that you grumble against
him— v what are we? Your grumbling is not w against us but against the
LORD.”
9Then Moses x said to Aaron, “Say to the whole congregation of the
people of Israel, y ‘Come near before the LORD, for he has heard your
grumbling.’” 10And as soon as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of
the people of Israel, they looked toward the wilderness, and behold, the
t glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud. 11And the LORD said to Moses,
12“I z have heard the grumbling of the people of Israel. Say to them, ‘At
a twilight you shall eat meat, and b in the morning you shall be filled with
bread. Then you shall know that I am the LORD your God.’”
13In the evening c quail came up and covered the camp, and in the
morning d dew lay around the camp. 14And when the dew had gone up,
there was on the face of the wilderness a fine, flake-like thing, fine as frost
on the ground. 15[†]When the people of Israel saw it, they said to one
another, e “What is it?” [1] For they f did not know what it was. And Moses
said to them, g “It is the bread that the LORD has given you to eat. 16This is
what the LORD has commanded: ‘Gather of it, each one of you, as much as
he can eat. You shall each take an h omer, [2] according to the number of the
persons that each of you has in his tent.’” 17And the people of Israel did so.
They gathered, some more, some less. 18But when they measured it with an
omer, i whoever gathered much had nothing left over, and whoever gathered
little had no lack. Each of them gathered as much as he could eat. 19And
Moses said to them, “Let no one leave any of it over till the morning.”
20[†]But they did not listen to Moses. Some left part of it till the morning,
and j it bred worms and stank. And Moses was angry with them. 21Morning
by morning they gathered it, each as much as he could eat; but when the sun
grew hot, it melted.
22[†]On k the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers
each. And when all the leaders of the congregation came and told Moses,
23he said to them, “This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Tomorrow is a
day of l solemn rest, a holy Sabbath to the LORD; bake what you will bake
and boil what you will boil, and all that is left over lay aside to be kept till
the morning.’” 24[†]So they laid it aside till the morning, as Moses
commanded them, and m it did not stink, and there were no worms in it.
25Moses said, “Eat it today, for l today is a Sabbath to the LORD; today you
will not find it in the field. 26Six days you shall gather it, but on the seventh
day, which is a Sabbath, there will be none.”
27On the seventh day some of the people went out to gather, but they
found none. 28And the LORD said to Moses, n “How long will you refuse to
keep my commandments and my laws? 29See! The LORD has given you the
Sabbath; therefore on the sixth day he gives you bread for two days.
Remain each of you in his place; let no one go out of his place on the
seventh day.” 30So the people o rested on the seventh day.
31Now the house of Israel called its name p manna. It was q like coriander
seed, white, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
32[†]Moses
said, “This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Let an omer of it be kept
throughout your generations, so that they may see the bread with which I
fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.’”
33And Moses said to Aaron, “Take a r jar, and put an omer of manna in it,
and place it before the LORD to be kept throughout your generations.” 34As
the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron placed it before s the testimony to
be kept. 35[†]The people of Israel t ate the manna forty years, till they came
to a habitable land. They ate the manna till u they came to the border of the
land of Canaan. 36(An omer is v the tenth part of an ephah.) [3]
Water from the Rock
EXODUS 17 w All the congregation of the people of Israel moved on from
the wilderness of Sin by stages, according to the commandment of the
LORD, and camped at Rephidim, but there was no water for the people to
drink. 2[†] x Therefore the people quarreled with Moses and said, “Give us
water to drink.” And Moses said to them, “Why do you quarrel with me?
Why do you y test the LORD?” 3But the people thirsted there for water, and
z the people grumbled against Moses and said, “Why did you bring us up
out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our livestock with thirst?” 4So
Moses cried to the LORD, “What shall I do with this people? They are
almost ready a to stone me.” 5And the LORD said to Moses, “Pass on before
the people, taking with you some of the elders of Israel, and take in your
hand the staff with b which you struck the Nile, and go. 6[†] c Behold, I will
stand before you there on the rock at Horeb, and you shall strike the rock,
and water shall come out of it, and the people will drink.” And Moses did
so, in the sight of the elders of Israel. 7[†]And he called the name of the
place d Massah [1] and e Meribah, [2] because of the quarreling of the people
of Israel, and because they tested the LORD by saying, “Is the LORD among
us or not?”
Israel Defeats Amalek
8[†] f Then Amalek came and fought with Israel at Rephidim. 9[†]So Moses
said to g Joshua, “Choose for us men, and go out and fight with Amalek.
Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with h the staff of God in my
hand.” 10So g Joshua did as Moses told him, and fought with Amalek, while
Moses, Aaron, and i Hur went up to the top of the hill. 11Whenever Moses
j held up his hand, Israel prevailed, and whenever he lowered his hand,
Amalek prevailed. 12But Moses’ hands grew weary, so they took a stone
and put it under him, and he sat on it, while Aaron and i Hur held up his
hands, one on one side, and the other on the other side. So his hands were
steady until the going down of the sun. 13And g Joshua overwhelmed
Amalek and his people with the sword.
14[†]Then the LORD said to Moses, “Write this as a memorial in a book
and recite it in the ears of g Joshua, that k I will utterly blot out the memory
of Amalek from under heaven.” 15And Moses l built an altar and called the
name of it, The LORD Is My Banner,
16saying, “A hand upon the throne [3]
of the LORD! k The LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to
generation.”
Jethro’s Advice