EXODUS 27 [†]“You shall make the n altar of acacia wood, five cubits [1]
long and five cubits broad. The altar shall be square, and its height shall be
three cubits. 2[†]And you shall make o horns for it on its four corners; its
horns shall be of one piece with it, and p you shall overlay it with bronze.
3You shall make pots for it to receive its ashes, and shovels and basins and
q forks and fire pans. You shall make all its utensils of bronze. 4You shall
also make for it a grating, a network of bronze, and on the net you shall
make four bronze rings at its four corners. 5And you shall set it under the
ledge of the altar so that the net extends halfway down the altar.
6And you
shall make poles for the altar, poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with
bronze. 7And the poles shall be put through the rings, so that the poles are
on the two sides of the altar when it is carried. 8You shall make it hollow,
with boards. r As it has been shown you on the mountain, so shall it be
made.
The Court of the Tabernacle
9[†] s “You shall make the court of the tabernacle. On the south side the
court shall have hangings of fine twined linen a hundred cubits long for one
side. 10[†]Its twenty pillars and their twenty bases shall be of bronze, but
the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.
11And likewise for
its length on the north side there shall be hangings a hundred cubits long, its
pillars twenty and their bases twenty, of bronze, but the hooks of the pillars
and their fillets shall be of silver.
12And for the breadth of the court on the
west side there shall be hangings for fifty cubits, with ten pillars and ten
bases. 13[†]The breadth of the court on the front to the east shall be fifty
cubits. 14The hangings for the one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits,
with their three pillars and three bases. 15On the other side the hangings
shall be fifteen cubits, with their three pillars and three bases. 16For the gate
of the court there shall be t a screen twenty cubits long, of blue and purple
and scarlet yarns and fine twined linen, embroidered with needlework. It
shall have four pillars and with them four bases. 17All the pillars around the
court shall be filleted with silver. Their hooks shall be of silver, and their
bases of bronze. 18The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits, the
breadth fifty, and the height five cubits, with hangings of fine twined linen
and bases of bronze. 19All the utensils of the tabernacle for every use, and
all its pegs and all the pegs of the court, shall be of bronze.
Oil for the Lamp
20
u “You shall command the people of Israel that they bring to you pure
beaten olive oil for the light, that a lamp may regularly be set up to burn.
21 v In the tent of meeting, w outside the veil that is before the testimony,
Aaron and his sons shall tend it from evening to morning before the LORD.
It shall be a statute forever to be observed throughout their generations by
the people of Israel.
The Priests’ Garments
EXODUS 28 “Then bring near to you x Aaron your brother, and his sons with
him, from among the people of Israel, to serve me as priests—Aaron and
Aaron’s sons, y Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
2[†] z And you shall
make holy garments for Aaron your brother, for glory and for beauty.
3You
shall speak to all the a skillful, whom I have filled with a spirit of skill, that
they make Aaron’s garments to consecrate him for my priesthood. 4These
are the garments that they shall make: a b breastpiece, an c ephod, d a robe,
e a coat of checker work, e a turban, and e a sash. They shall make holy
garments for Aaron your brother and his sons to serve me as priests. 5They
shall receive f gold, blue and purple and scarlet yarns, and fine twined linen.
6 g “And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue and purple and scarlet
yarns, and of fine twined linen, skillfully worked. 7It shall have two
shoulder pieces attached to its two edges, so that it may be joined together.
8And the h skillfully woven band on it shall be made like it and be of one
piece with it, of gold, blue and purple and scarlet yarns, and fine twined
linen. 9[†]You shall take two onyx stones, and engrave on them the names
of the sons of Israel, 10six of their names on the one stone, and the names of
the remaining six on the other stone, in the order of their birth. 11As a
jeweler engraves signets, so shall you engrave the two stones with the
names of the sons of Israel. You shall enclose them in settings of gold
filigree. 12And you shall set the two stones on the shoulder pieces of the
ephod, as stones of remembrance for the sons of Israel. And i Aaron shall
bear their names before the LORD on his two shoulders j for remembrance.
13You shall make settings of gold filigree, 14and two chains of pure gold,
twisted like cords; and you shall attach the corded chains to the settings.
15 k “You shall make a breastpiece of judgment, in skilled work. In the
style of the ephod you shall make it—of gold, blue and purple and scarlet
yarns, and fine twined linen shall you make it. 16It shall be square and
doubled, a span [1] its length and a span its breadth. 17
l You shall set in it
four rows of stones. A row of sardius, [2] topaz, and carbuncle shall be the
first row; 18and the second row an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond;
19and the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 20and the fourth
row a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper. They shall be set in gold filigree. 21There
shall be twelve stones with their names according to the names of the sons
of Israel. They shall be like signets, each engraved with its name, for the
twelve tribes. 22You shall make for the breastpiece twisted chains like
cords, of pure gold. 23And you shall make for the breastpiece two rings of
gold, and put the two rings on the two edges of the breastpiece. 24And you
shall put the two cords of gold in the two rings at the edges of the
breastpiece. 25The two ends of the two cords you shall attach to the two
settings of filigree, and so attach it in front to the shoulder pieces of the
ephod. 26You shall make two rings of gold, and put them at the two ends of
the breastpiece, on its inside edge next to the ephod. 27And you shall make
two rings of gold, and attach them in front to the lower part of the two
shoulder pieces of the ephod, at its seam above the m skillfully woven band
of the ephod. 28And they shall bind the breastpiece by its rings to the rings
of the ephod with a lace of blue, so that it may lie on the skillfully woven
band of the ephod, so that the breastpiece shall not come loose from the
ephod. 29 n So Aaron shall bear the names of the sons of Israel in the
breastpiece of judgment on his heart, when he goes into the Holy Place, to
bring them to regular o remembrance before the LORD.
30[†]And in the
breastpiece of judgment p you shall put the Urim and the Thummim, and
they shall be on Aaron’s heart, when he goes in before the LORD. Thus
Aaron shall bear the judgment of the people of Israel on his heart before the
LORD regularly.
31 q “You shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue. 32It shall have an
opening for the head in the middle of it, with a woven binding around the
opening, like the opening in a garment, [3] so that it may not tear.
33On its
hem you shall make pomegranates of blue and purple and scarlet yarns,
around its hem, with bells of gold between them, 34a golden bell and a
pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, around the hem of the robe.
35[†]And it shall be on Aaron when he ministers, and its sound shall be
heard when he goes into the Holy Place before the LORD, and when he
comes out, so that he does not die.
36[†]“You shall make r a plate of pure gold and engrave on it, like the
engraving of a signet, s ‘Holy to the LORD.’ 37And you shall fasten it on the
turban by a cord of blue. It shall be on the front of the turban. 38It shall be
on Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron shall t bear any guilt from the holy things
that the people of Israel consecrate as their holy gifts. It shall regularly be
on his forehead, that they may be accepted before the LORD.
39“You shall weave the coat in checker work of fine linen, and you shall
make a turban of fine linen, and you shall make a sash embroidered with
needlework.
40 u “For Aaron’s sons you shall make coats and sashes and caps. You
shall make them v for glory and beauty.
41And you shall put them on Aaron
your brother, and on his sons with him, and shall w anoint them and ordain
them and x consecrate them, that they may serve me as priests. 42[†]You
shall make for them y linen undergarments to cover their naked flesh. They
shall reach from the hips to the thighs; 43and they shall be on Aaron and on
his sons when they go into the tent of meeting or when they come near the
altar to minister in the Holy Place, lest they z bear guilt and die. a This shall
be a statute forever for him and for his offspring after him.
Consecration of the Priests