EXODUS 12 [†]The LORD said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt,
2[†] f “This month shall be for you the beginning of months. It shall be the
first month of the year for you. 3Tell all the congregation of Israel that on
the tenth day of this month every man shall take a lamb g according to their
fathers’ houses, a lamb for a household. 4And if the household is too small
for a lamb, then he and his nearest neighbor shall take according to the
number of persons; according to what each can eat you shall make your
count for the lamb. 5Your lamb shall be h without blemish, a male a year
old. You may take it from the sheep or from the goats, 6and you shall keep it
until the i fourteenth day of this month, when the whole assembly of the
congregation of Israel shall kill their lambs at twilight. [1]
7“Then they shall take some of the blood and put it on the j two doorposts
and the lintel of the houses in which they eat it. 8[†]They shall eat the flesh
that night, roasted on the fire; with k unleavened bread and bitter herbs they
shall eat it. 9Do not eat any of it raw or boiled in water, but l roasted, its
head with its legs and its inner parts. 10And m you shall let none of it remain
until the morning; anything that remains until the morning you shall burn.
11[†]In this manner you shall eat it: with n your belt fastened, your sandals
on your feet, and your staff in your hand. And you shall eat it in haste. o It is
the LORD’s Passover.
12[†]For p I will pass through the land of Egypt that
night, and I will strike all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and
beast; and on q all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments: r I am the
LORD.
13[†] s The blood shall be a sign for you, on the houses where you are.
And when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and no plague will befall
you to destroy you, when I strike the land of Egypt.
14[†]“This day shall be t for you a memorial day, and you shall keep it as
a feast to the LORD; throughout your generations, as a u statute forever, you
shall keep it as a feast. 15[†] v Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread.
On the first day you shall remove leaven out of your houses, for if anyone
eats what is leavened, from the first day until the seventh day, w that person
shall be cut off from Israel. 16On the first day you shall hold a x holy
assembly, and on the seventh day a holy assembly. No work shall be done
on those days. But what everyone needs to eat, that alone may be prepared
by you. 17And you shall observe the Feast of Unleavened Bread, for y on
this very day I brought your z hosts out of the land of Egypt. Therefore you
shall observe this day, throughout your generations, as a statute forever.
18 a In the first month, from the fourteenth day of the month at evening, you
shall eat unleavened bread until the twenty-first day of the month at
evening. 19[†] b For seven days no leaven is to be found in your houses. If
anyone eats what is leavened, b that person will be cut off from the
congregation of Israel, c whether he is a sojourner or a native of the land.
20You shall eat nothing leavened; in all your dwelling places you shall eat
unleavened bread.”
21Then Moses called all the elders of Israel and said to them, “Go and
select lambs for yourselves d according to your clans, and kill the Passover
lamb. 22[†]Take a bunch of e hyssop and f dip it in the blood that is in the
basin, and touch g the lintel and the two doorposts with the blood that is in
the basin. h None of you shall go out of the door of his house until the
morning. 23[†] i For the LORD will pass through to strike the Egyptians, and
when he sees the blood on g the lintel and on the two doorposts, the LORD
will pass over the door and j will not allow the destroyer to enter your
houses to strike you. 24You shall observe this rite as a statute for you and for
your sons forever.
25And when you come to the land that the LORD will give
you, k as he has promised, you shall keep this service. 26And l when your
children say to you, ‘What do you mean by this service?’ 27you shall say,
m ‘It is the sacrifice of the LORD’s Passover, for he passed over the houses
of the people of Israel in Egypt, when he struck the Egyptians but spared
our houses.’” And the people n bowed their heads and worshiped.
28Then the people of Israel went and did so; as the LORD had commanded
Moses and Aaron, so they did.
The Tenth Plague: Death of the Firstborn
29 o At midnight the p LORD struck down all the firstborn in the land of
Egypt, q from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn
of the captive who was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of the livestock.
30And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all his servants and all the
Egyptians. And there was r a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house
where someone was not dead. 31Then he summoned Moses and Aaron by
night and said, “Up, go out from among my people, s both you and the
people of Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as you have said. 32 t Take your
flocks and your herds, as you have said, and be gone, and bless me also!”
The Exodus
33 u The Egyptians were urgent with the people to send them out of the land
in haste. For they said, “We shall all be dead.” 34So the people took their
dough before it was leavened, their kneading bowls being bound up in their
cloaks on their shoulders. 35[†]The people of Israel had also done as Moses
told them, for they had v asked the Egyptians for silver and gold jewelry
and for clothing. 36 w And the LORD had given the people favor in the sight
of the Egyptians, so that x they let them have what they asked. Thus they
plundered the Egyptians.
37[†]And the y people of Israel journeyed from z Rameses to Succoth,
a about six hundred thousand men on foot, besides women and children.
38A b mixed multitude also went up with them, and very much livestock,
both flocks and herds. 39[†]And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough
that they had brought out of Egypt, for it was not leavened, because u they
were thrust out of Egypt and c could not wait, nor had they prepared any
provisions for themselves.
40The time that the people of Israel lived in Egypt was 430 years. 41[†]At
the end of d 430 years, on that very day, all the hosts of the LORD went out
from the land of Egypt. 42It was a night of watching by the LORD, to bring
them out of the land of Egypt; so this same night is a e night of watching
kept to the LORD by all the people of Israel throughout their generations.
Institution of the Passover
43[†]And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the statute of the
Passover: no foreigner shall eat of it, 44but every slave [2] that is f bought for
money may eat of it after you have circumcised him. 45 g No foreigner or
hired worker may eat of it. 46It shall be eaten in one house; you shall not
take any of the flesh outside the house, and h you shall not break any of its
bones. 47
i All the congregation of Israel shall keep it. 48
j If a stranger shall
sojourn with you and would keep the Passover to the LORD, let all his males
be circumcised. Then he may come near and keep it; he k shall be as a
native of the land. But no uncircumcised person shall eat of it. 49There shall
be l one law for the native and for the j stranger who sojourns among you.”
50All the people of Israel did just as the LORD commanded Moses and
Aaron. 51And on that very day the m LORD brought the people of Israel out
of the land of Egypt by their n hosts.
Consecration of the Firstborn
EXODUS 13 The LORD said to Moses, 2[†] o “Consecrate to me all the
firstborn. Whatever is the first to open the womb among the people of
Israel, both of man and of beast, is mine.”
The Feast of Unleavened Bread
3[†]Then Moses said to the people, p “Remember this day in which you
came out from Egypt, out of the house of slavery, q for by a strong hand the
LORD brought you out from this place. r No leavened bread shall be eaten.
4Today, in the month of s Abib, you are going out. 5And when the LORD
brings you into t the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites, which u he swore to your fathers to give you, a
land v flowing with milk and honey, w you shall keep this service in this
month. 6[†] x Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh
day there shall be a feast to the LORD.
7Unleavened bread shall be eaten for
seven days; no leavened bread shall be seen with you, and no leaven shall
be seen with you in all your territory.
8
y You shall tell your son on that day,
‘It is because of what the LORD did for me when I came out of Egypt.’
9[†]And it shall z be to you as a sign on your hand and as a a memorial
z between your eyes, that the law of the LORD may be in your mouth. For
with a strong hand the LORD has brought you out of Egypt. 10
b You shall
therefore keep this statute at its appointed time from year to year.
11[†]“When the LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanites, c as he
swore to you and your fathers, and shall give it to you, 12
d you shall set
apart to the LORD all that first opens the womb. All the firstborn of your
animals that are males shall be the LORD’s. 13 e Every firstborn of a donkey
you shall redeem with a lamb, or if you will not redeem it you shall break
its neck. Every f firstborn of man among your sons you shall redeem.
14
g And when in time to come your son asks you, ‘What does this mean?’
you shall say to him, h ‘By a strong hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt,
from the house of i slavery.
15For when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us
go, the j LORD killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn
of man and the firstborn of animals. Therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all the
males that first open the womb, but k all the firstborn of my sons I redeem.’
16 l It shall be as a mark on your hand or frontlets between your eyes, for
m by a strong hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt.”
Pillars of Cloud and Fire
17[†]When Pharaoh let the people go, God did n not lead them by way of
the land of the Philistines, although that was near. For God said, “Lest the
people o change their minds when they see war and return to Egypt.”
18[†]But God p led the people around by the way of the wilderness toward
the Red Sea. And the people of Israel went up out of the land of Egypt
equipped for battle. 19[†]Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for
Joseph [1] had made the sons of Israel solemnly swear, saying, q “God will
surely visit you, and you shall carry up my bones with you from here.”
20And r they moved on from Succoth and encamped at Etham, on the edge
of the wilderness. 21[†]And s the LORD went before them by day in a pillar
of cloud to lead them along the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give
them light, that they might travel by day and by night. 22The pillar of cloud
by day and the pillar of fire by night did not depart from before the people.
Crossing the Red Sea
EXODUS 14 Then the LORD said to Moses, 2[†]“Tell the people of Israel to
t turn back and encamp in front of Pi-hahiroth, between u Migdol and the
sea, in front of Baal-zephon; you shall encamp facing it, by the sea. 3For
Pharaoh will say of the people of Israel, ‘They are wandering in the land;
the wilderness has shut them in.’ 4[†]And v I will harden Pharaoh’s heart,
and he will pursue them, and I will w get glory over Pharaoh and all his
host, x and the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD.” And they did so.
5[†]When the king of Egypt was told that the people had fled, the y mind
of Pharaoh and his servants was changed toward the people, and they said,
“What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?”
6So he made ready his chariot and took his army with him, 7[†]and took
z six hundred chosen chariots and all the other chariots of Egypt with
officers over all of them. 8And v the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and he pursued the people of Israel while a the people of
Israel were going out defiantly.
9The b Egyptians pursued them, all
Pharaoh’s horses and chariots and his horsemen and his army, and overtook
them c encamped at the sea, by Pi-hahiroth, in front of Baal-zephon.
10[†]When Pharaoh drew near, the people of Israel lifted up their eyes,
and behold, the Egyptians were marching after them, and they feared
greatly. And the people of Israel d cried out to the LORD.
11They e said to
Moses, “Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us
away to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us in bringing us out
of Egypt? 12[†]Is not this what f we said to you in Egypt: ‘Leave us alone
that we may serve the Egyptians’? For it would have been better for us to
serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.” 13[†]And Moses said to
the people, g “Fear not, stand firm, and see the salvation of the LORD, which
he will work for you today. For h the Egyptians whom you see today, you
shall never see again. 14 i The LORD will fight for you, and you have only
j to be silent.”
15The LORD said to Moses, “Why do you cry to me? Tell the people of
Israel to go forward. 16 k Lift up your staff, and k stretch out your hand over
the sea and divide it, that the people of Israel may go through the sea on dry
ground. 17[†]And l I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians so that they
shall go in after them, and m I will get glory over Pharaoh and all his host,
his chariots, and his horsemen. 18And the Egyptians n shall know that I am
the LORD, m when I have gotten glory over Pharaoh, his chariots, and his
horsemen.”
19[†] o Then the angel of God who was going before the host of Israel
moved and went behind them, and the pillar of cloud moved from before
them and stood behind them, 20coming between the host of Egypt and the
host of Israel. And there was the cloud and the darkness. And it lit up the
night [1] without one coming near the other all night.
21Then Moses k stretched out his hand over the sea, and the LORD drove
the sea back by p a strong east wind all night and q made the sea dry land,
and the waters were r divided. 22[†]And s the people of Israel went into the
midst of the sea on dry ground, the waters being t a wall to them on their
right hand and on their left. 23The Egyptians pursued and went in after them
into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his
horsemen. 24And in the morning watch the LORD in the pillar of fire and of
cloud looked down on the Egyptian forces and threw the Egyptian forces
into a panic, 25clogging [2] their chariot wheels so that they drove heavily.
And the Egyptians said, “Let us flee from before Israel, for the u LORD
fights for them against the Egyptians.”
26Then the LORD said to Moses, v “Stretch out your hand over the sea,
that the water may come back upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and
upon their horsemen.” 27
w So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea,
and the sea x returned to its normal course when the morning appeared. And
as the Egyptians fled into it, the LORD y threw [3] the Egyptians into the
midst of the sea. 28The z waters returned and covered the chariots and the
horsemen; of all the host of Pharaoh that had followed them into the sea,
a not one of them remained. 29But the b people of Israel walked on dry
ground through the sea, the waters being a wall to them on their right hand
and on their left.
30Thus the LORD c saved Israel that day from the hand of the Egyptians,
and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore. 31[†] d Israel saw the
great power that the LORD used against the Egyptians, so the people feared
the LORD, and they e believed in the LORD and in his servant Moses.
The Song of Moses