EZEKIEL 42 [†]Then he led me out into x the outer court, y toward the north,
and he brought me to x the chambers that were opposite z the separate yard
and opposite a the building on the north. 2The length of the building whose
door faced north was b a hundred cubits, [1] and c the breadth fifty cubits.
3Facing d the twenty cubits that belonged to the inner court, and facing e the
pavement that belonged to the outer court, was f gallery [2] against gallery in
three stories. 4And g before the chambers was a passage inward, ten cubits
wide and h a hundred cubits long, [3] and g their doors were on the north.
5Now the upper chambers were narrower, for the galleries took more away
from them than from the lower and middle chambers of the building. 6For
they were in three stories, and they had no pillars like the pillars of the
courts. Thus the upper chambers were set back from the ground more than
the lower and the middle ones. 7And i there was a wall outside parallel to
the chambers, toward the outer court, opposite the chambers, j fifty cubits
long. 8For the chambers on the outer court were fifty cubits long, while
those opposite k the nave [4] were l a hundred cubits long. 9Below these
chambers was m an entrance on the east side, as one enters them from the
outer court.
10In the thickness of n the wall of the court, on the south [5] also, opposite
o the yard and opposite o the building, there were p chambers 11with q a
passage in front of them. They were similar to the chambers on the north, of
the same length and breadth, with the same exits [6] and arrangements and
q doors, 12as were the entrances of the chambers on the south. There was an
entrance at the beginning of the passage, the passage before n the
corresponding wall on the east as one enters them. [7]
13Then he said to me, “The north chambers and the south chambers
opposite o the yard are the holy chambers, r where the priests who approach
the LORD s shall eat the t most holy offerings. There they shall put the most
holy offerings— t the grain offering, u the sin offering, and u the guilt
offering—for the place is holy.
14When the priests enter the Holy Place,
they shall not go out of it into the outer court v without laying there the
garments in which they minister, for these are holy. v They shall put on
other garments before they go near to that which is for the people.”
15[†]Now when he had finished measuring the interior of the temple area,
he led me out by w the gate that faced east, and measured the temple area all
around. 16He measured the east side with x the measuring reed, 500 cubits
by the measuring reed all around. 17He measured the north side, 500 cubits
by the measuring reed all around. 18He measured the south side, 500 cubits
by the measuring reed. 19Then he turned to the west side and measured, 500
cubits by the measuring reed. 20He measured it on the four sides. It had y a
wall around it, z 500 cubits long and z 500 cubits broad, a to make a
separation between the holy and the common.
The Glory of the LORD Fills the Temple