EZEKIEL 22 [†]And the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 2“And you,
y son of man, z will you judge, will you judge a the bloody city? b Then
declare to her all her abominations. 3You shall say, Thus says the Lord GOD:
A city that sheds blood in her midst, so that c her time may come, and that
makes idols to defile herself! 4You have become guilty a by the blood that
you have shed, and defiled by the idols that you have made, and you have
brought c your days near, the appointed time of [1] your years has come.
d Therefore I have made you a reproach to the nations, and a mockery to all
the countries. 5Those who are near and those who are far from you will
mock you; e your name is defiled; f you are full of tumult.
6[†]“Behold, g the princes of Israel in you, every one according to his
power, have been bent on shedding blood. 7Father and mother h are treated
with contempt in you; the sojourner i suffers extortion in your midst; the
fatherless and the widow i are wronged in you. 8 j You have despised my
holy things and k profaned my Sabbaths. 9[†] l There are men in you who
slander to shed blood, and people in you m who eat on the mountains; n they
commit lewdness in your midst. 10In you o men uncover their fathers’
nakedness; in you they violate women who are unclean in their menstrual
impurity.
11
p One commits abomination with his neighbor’s wife; q another
lewdly defiles his daughter-in-law; r another in you violates his sister, his
father’s daughter.
12[†]In you s they take bribes to shed blood; t you take
interest and profit [2] and make gain of your neighbors by extortion; but
u me you have forgotten, declares the Lord GOD.
13“Behold, v I strike my hand at w the dishonest gain that you have made,
and at x the blood that has been in your midst. 14
y Can your courage endure,
or can your hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with you? z I the
LORD have spoken, and I will do it. 15 a I will scatter you among the nations
and disperse you through the countries, and b I will consume your
uncleanness out of you. 16And c you shall be profaned by your own doing
d in the sight of the nations, e and you shall know that I am the LORD.”
17[†]And the word of the LORD came to me: 18 f “Son of man, the house of
Israel has become g dross to me; all of them are h bronze and tin and iron
and lead in the furnace; they are i dross of silver.
19Therefore thus says the
Lord GOD: Because you have all become dross, therefore, behold, I will
gather you into the midst of Jerusalem. 20As one gathers silver and bronze
and iron and lead and tin into a furnace, j to blow the fire on it in order to
melt it, so I will gather you k in my anger and in my wrath, and I will put
you in and melt you. 21I will gather you and blow on you with the fire of
my wrath, and you shall be melted in the midst of it. 22As silver is melted in
a furnace, so you shall be melted in the midst of it, and you shall know that
I am the LORD; l I have poured out my wrath upon you.”
23[†]And the word of the LORD came to me: 24“Son of man, say to her,
You are a land that is m not cleansed n or rained upon in the day of
indignation. 25 o The conspiracy of her prophets in her midst is p like a
roaring lion q tearing the prey; they have devoured human lives; they have
taken treasure and precious things; they have made many widows in her
midst. 26 r Her priests s have done violence to my law and t have profaned
my holy things. u They have made no distinction between the holy and the
common, neither have they taught the difference between the unclean and
the clean, and v they have disregarded my Sabbaths, w so that I am profaned
among them. 27 x Her princes in her midst are like wolves y tearing the prey,
z shedding blood, destroying lives to get dishonest gain. 28And a her
prophets have smeared whitewash for them, b seeing false visions and
divining lies for them, saying, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD,’ when the LORD
has not spoken. 29The people of the land c have practiced extortion and
committed robbery. They have oppressed the poor and needy, and c have
extorted from the sojourner without justice. 30[†] d And I sought for a man
among them e who should build up the wall e and stand in the breach before
me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none. 31Therefore f I
have poured out my indignation upon them. I have consumed them with the
fire of my wrath. I have returned g their way upon their heads, declares the
Lord GOD.”
Oholah and Oholibah