EZEKIEL 10 [†]Then I looked, and behold, x on the expanse that was over
the heads of the cherubim there appeared above them something y like a
sapphire, [1] in appearance like a throne. 2[†]And he said to z the man
clothed in linen, “Go in among a the whirling wheels underneath the
cherubim. Fill your hands with b burning coals from between the cherubim,
and c scatter them over the city.”
And he went in d before my eyes. 3Now the cherubim were standing e on
the south side of the house, when the man went in, and f a cloud filled g the
inner court. 4[†]And h the glory of the LORD i went up from the cherub to
the threshold of the house, and the house f was filled with the cloud, and the
court was filled with j the brightness of the glory of the LORD.
5And k the
sound of the wings of the cherubim was heard as far as the outer court,
k like the voice of God Almighty when he speaks.
6And when he commanded l the man clothed in linen, m “Take fire from
between n the whirling wheels, from between the cherubim,” he went in and
stood beside a wheel. 7And a cherub stretched out his hand from between
the cherubim to the fire that was between the cherubim, and took some of it
and put it into the hands of the man clothed in linen, who took it and went
out. 8The cherubim appeared to have o the form of a human hand under
their wings.
9[†] p And I looked, and behold, there were four wheels beside the
cherubim, one beside each cherub, and q the appearance of the wheels was
r like sparkling s beryl. 10And as for their appearance, the four had the same
likeness, as if a wheel were within a wheel. 11
t When they went, they went
in any of their four directions [2] u without turning as they went, v but in
whatever direction the front wheel [3] faced, the others followed without
turning as they went. 12 w And their whole body, their rims, and their spokes,
their wings, [4] and the wheels were full of eyes all around—the wheels that
the four of them had. 13As for the wheels, they were called in my hearing
n “the whirling wheels.” 14 x And every one had four faces: y the first face
was the face of the cherub, and the second face was z a human face, and the
third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.
15 a And the cherubim mounted up. These were b the living creatures that
I saw by c the Chebar canal. 16 d And when the cherubim went, the wheels
went beside them. And d when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount
up from the earth, the wheels did not turn from beside them. 17 e When they
stood still, these stood still, and when they mounted up, these mounted up
with them, for the spirit of the living creatures [5] was in them.
18
f Then g the glory of the LORD went out from the threshold of the
house, and stood over the cherubim. 19 h And the cherubim lifted up their
wings and mounted up from the earth i before my eyes as they went out,
with the wheels beside them. And they stood at the entrance of the j east
gate of the house of the LORD, and k the glory of the God of Israel was over
them.
20 l These were the living creatures that I saw m underneath the God of
Israel by n the Chebar canal; and I knew that they were cherubim. 21
o Each
had four faces, and each four wings, and underneath their wings p the
likeness of human hands. 22
q And as for the likeness of their faces, they
were the same faces whose appearance I had seen by the Chebar canal.
r Each one of them went straight forward.
Judgment on Wicked Counselors