EZEKIEL 6 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] r “Son of man, s set
your face toward t the mountains of Israel, and u prophesy against them,
3[†]and say, v You mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD!
Thus says the Lord GOD to w the mountains and x the hills, to y the ravines
and the valleys: Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, z and I will
destroy your high places. 4 z Your altars shall become desolate, and your
a incense altars shall be broken, and I will cast down your slain before your
idols. 5 z And I will lay the dead bodies of the people of Israel before their
idols, b and I will scatter your bones around your altars. 6Wherever you
dwell, c the cities shall be waste and d the high places ruined, so that your
altars will be waste and ruined, [1] your idols broken and destroyed, your
a incense altars cut down, and your works wiped out. 7And the slain shall
fall in your midst, and you shall know that I am the LORD.
8[†] e “Yet I will leave some of you alive. When you have among the
nations f some who escape the sword, and when you are scattered through
the countries, 9then those of you who escape g will remember me among the
nations where they are carried captive, how h I have been broken over their
whoring heart that has departed from me and over their eyes i that go
whoring after their idols. g And they will be loathsome in their own sight
for the evils that they have committed, for all their abominations. 10And
they shall know that I am the LORD. j I have not said in vain that I would do
this evil to them.”
11Thus says the Lord GOD: k “Clap your hands l and stamp your foot and
say, Alas, because of all the evil abominations of the house of Israel, m for
they shall fall by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. 12 n He who is far
off shall die of pestilence, and he who is near shall fall by the sword, and he
who is left and is preserved shall die of famine. o Thus I will spend my fury
upon them. 13And you shall know that I am the LORD, p when their slain lie
among their idols around their altars, q on every high hill, r on all the
mountaintops, s under every green tree, and under t every leafy oak,
wherever u they offered pleasing aroma to all their idols. 14And v I will
stretch out my hand against them and w make the land desolate and waste,
x in all their dwelling places, from the wilderness to y Riblah. [2] Then z they
will know that I am the LORD.”
The Day of the Wrath of the LORD
EZEKIEL 7 The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†]“And you, a O son of
man, thus says the Lord GOD to the land of Israel: b An end! The end has
come upon the four corners of the land. [1] 3[†]Now b the end is upon you,
and c I will send my anger upon you; d I will judge you according to your
ways, and I will punish you for all your abominations. 4
e And my eye will
not spare you, nor will I have pity, but f I will punish you for your ways,
while your abominations are in your midst. g Then you will know that I am
the LORD.
5“Thus says the Lord GOD: Disaster h after disaster! [2] Behold, it comes.
6 b An end has come; the end has come; it has awakened against you.
Behold, it comes. 7 i Your doom [3] has come to you, O inhabitant of the
land. j The time has come; the day is near, a day of tumult, and not k of
joyful shouting on the mountains. 8Now I will soon l pour out my wrath
upon you, and m spend my anger against you, d and judge you according to
your ways, and I will punish you for all your abominations. 9
e And my eye
will not spare, nor will I have pity. I will punish you according to your
ways, while your abominations are in your midst. n Then you will know
that I am the LORD, who strikes.
10[†] o “Behold, the day! Behold, it comes! p Your doom has come; q the
rod has blossomed; pride has budded. 11
r Violence has grown up into q a
rod of wickedness. s None of them shall remain, nor their abundance, nor
their wealth; neither shall there be preeminence among them. [4] 12[†] j The
time has come; the day has arrived. Let not t the buyer rejoice, nor t the
seller mourn, u for wrath is upon all their multitude. [5] 13For v the seller
shall not return to what he has sold, while they live. w For the vision
concerns all their multitude; it shall not turn back; and because of his
iniquity, none can maintain his life. [6]
14“They have blown the trumpet and made everything ready, but none
goes to battle, x for my wrath is upon all their multitude. 15 y The sword is
without; pestilence and famine are within. z He who is in the field dies by
the sword, z and him who is in the city famine and pestilence devour.
16 a And if any survivors escape, they will be on the mountains, like b doves
of the valleys, all of them moaning, each one over his iniquity.
17[†] c All
hands are feeble, and all knees turn to water.
18 d They put on sackcloth, and
e horror covers them. Shame is on all faces, and f baldness on all their
heads. 19They cast their silver into the streets, and their gold is like an
unclean thing. g Their silver and gold are not able to deliver them in the day
of the wrath of the LORD. They cannot satisfy their hunger or fill their
stomachs with it. h For it was i the stumbling block of their iniquity.
20 j His
beautiful ornament they used for pride, and k they made their abominable
images and their detestable things of it. Therefore l I make it an unclean
thing to them. 21And I will give it into the hands of m foreigners for prey,
n and to the wicked of the earth for spoil, and l they shall profane it. 22I will
turn my face from them, and l they shall profane my treasured [7] place.
Robbers shall enter l and profane it.
23
o “Forge a chain! [8] p For the land is full of bloody crimes q and the
city is full of violence. 24I will bring r the worst of the nations to take
possession of their houses. s I will put an end to the pride of the strong,
t and their holy places [9] shall be profaned. 25
u When anguish comes, v they
will seek peace, but there shall be none. 26[†] w Disaster comes upon
disaster; x rumor follows rumor. y They seek a vision from the prophet,
while z the law [10] perishes from the priest and a counsel from the elders.
27The king mourns, the prince is wrapped in despair, and the hands of the
people of the land are paralyzed by terror. According to their way b I will do
to them, and according to their judgments I will judge them, c and they shall
know that I am the LORD.”
Abominations in the Temple