EZEKIEL 44 [†]Then he brought me w back to the outer gate of the
sanctuary, x which faces east. And it was shut. 2And the LORD said to me,
“This gate shall remain shut; it shall not be opened, and no one shall enter
by it, for y the LORD, the God of Israel, has entered by it. Therefore it shall
remain shut. 3Only z the prince may sit in it a to eat bread before the LORD.
He b shall enter by way of the vestibule of the gate, and shall go out by the
same way.”
4[†]Then he brought me by way of c the north gate to the front of the
temple, and I looked, and behold, d the glory of the LORD filled the temple
of the LORD. And e I fell on my face. 5And the LORD said to me, f “Son of
man, mark well, g see with your eyes, g and hear with your ears all that I
shall tell you concerning h all the statutes of the temple of the LORD and all
its laws. And mark well h the entrance to the temple and all the exits from
the sanctuary.
6And say to i the rebellious house, [1] to the j house of Israel,
Thus says the Lord GOD: O house of Israel, k enough of all your
abominations, 7in l admitting foreigners, m uncircumcised in heart and flesh,
to be in my sanctuary, n profaning my temple, when you offer to me my
food, the fat and the blood. You [2] have broken my covenant, in addition to
all your abominations. 8And o you have not kept charge of my holy things,
but you have set others to keep my charge for you in my sanctuary.
9“Thus says the Lord GOD: p No foreigner, uncircumcised in heart and
flesh, of all the foreigners who are among the people of Israel, shall enter
my sanctuary.
10[†]But q the Levites who went far from me, going astray
from me after their idols r when Israel went astray, s shall bear their
punishment. [3] 11They shall be t ministers in my sanctuary, having oversight
u at the gates of the temple and ministering in the temple. They shall
slaughter the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and v they shall
stand before the people, to minister to them. 12Because they ministered to
them before their idols and became w a stumbling block of iniquity to the
house of Israel, therefore I have x sworn concerning them, declares the Lord
GOD, and they shall bear their punishment. 13They y shall not come near to
me, to serve me as priest, nor come near any of my holy things and the
things that are most holy, but z they shall bear their shame and the
abominations that they have committed. 14Yet I will appoint them to keep
a charge of the temple, b to do all its service and all that is to be done in it.
Rules for Levitical Priests
15[†]“But c the Levitical priests, c the sons of Zadok, who kept a the charge
of my sanctuary r when the people of Israel went astray from me, shall
come near to me d to minister to me. And they shall stand before me to offer
me e the fat and the blood, declares the Lord GOD.
16They shall enter my
sanctuary, and they shall approach f my table, to minister to me, and they
shall keep my charge. 17When they enter the gates of the inner court, they
shall wear g linen garments. They shall have nothing of wool on them,
while they minister at the gates of the inner court, and within. 18They shall
have linen turbans on their heads, and linen undergarments around their
waists. They shall not bind themselves with anything that causes sweat.
19And when they go out into the outer court to the people, they shall put off
the garments in which they have been ministering h and lay them in the holy
chambers. And i they shall put on other garments, j lest they transmit
holiness to the people with their garments. 20 k They shall not shave their
heads or l let their locks grow long; they shall surely trim the hair of their
heads. 21
m No priest shall drink wine when he enters the inner court.
22 n They shall not marry a widow or a divorced woman, but only virgins of
the offspring of the house of Israel, or a widow who is the widow of a
priest. 23 o They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and
the common, and o show them how to distinguish between the unclean and
the clean. 24 p In a dispute, they shall act as judges, and they shall judge it
according to my judgments. They shall keep my laws and my statutes in all
my appointed feasts, and q they shall keep my Sabbaths holy.
25 r They shall
not defile themselves by going near to a dead person. However, for father or
mother, for son or daughter, for brother or unmarried sister they may defile
themselves. 26
s After he [4] has become clean, they shall count seven days
for him. 27And on the day that he goes into the Holy Place, t into the inner
court, to minister in the Holy Place, u he shall offer his sin offering, declares
the Lord GOD.
28 v “This shall be their inheritance: I am their inheritance: and w you shall
give them no possession in Israel; I am their possession. 29
x They shall eat
the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and y every
devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs. 30 z And the first of all the firstfruits of
all kinds, and every offering of all kinds from all your offerings, shall
belong to the priests. a You shall also give to the priests the first of your
dough, b that a blessing may rest on your house. 31 c The priests shall not eat
of d anything, whether bird or beast, that has died of itself or is torn by wild
animals.
The Holy District