EZEKIEL 36 [†]“And you, i son of man, prophesy to j the mountains of
Israel, and say, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD.
2Thus
says the Lord GOD: Because k the enemy said of you, l ‘Aha!’ and, ‘The
ancient m heights have become our possession,’ 3therefore prophesy, and
say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Precisely because n they made you desolate
and crushed you from all sides, so that you became the possession of the
rest of the nations, and o you became the talk and evil gossip of the people,
4therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD: Thus says
the Lord GOD to p the mountains and the hills, the ravines and the valleys,
q the desolate wastes and the deserted cities, which have become r a prey
and derision to the rest of the nations all around, 5therefore thus says the
Lord GOD: Surely I have spoken in s my hot jealousy against the rest of the
nations and t against all Edom, who u gave my land to themselves as a
possession v with wholehearted joy and w utter contempt, that they might
make its pasturelands a prey.
6Therefore prophesy concerning the land of
Israel, and say to j the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys, Thus
says the Lord GOD: x Behold, I have spoken in my jealous wrath, because
you have suffered y the reproach of the nations. 7Therefore thus says the
Lord GOD: z I swear that the nations that are all around you y shall
themselves suffer reproach.
8[†]“But you, O mountains of Israel, a shall shoot forth your branches
and yield your fruit to my people Israel, for b they will soon come home.
9For c behold, I am for you, and I will turn to you, and d you shall be tilled
and sown. 10And e I will multiply people on you, the whole house of Israel,
all of it. f The cities shall be inhabited and the waste places rebuilt. 11And I
will multiply on you g man and beast, and h they shall multiply and be
fruitful. And I will cause you to be inhabited as in i your former times, and
j will do more good to you than ever before. k Then you will know that I am
the LORD.
12I will let people walk on you, even my people Israel. l And they
shall possess you, and you shall be their inheritance, and you shall no
longer m bereave them of children. 13Thus says the Lord GOD: Because they
say to you, n ‘You devour people, and you bereave your nation of children,’
14therefore you shall no longer devour people and no longer bereave your
nation of children, declares the Lord GOD.
15And I will not let you hear
anymore y the reproach of the nations, and you shall no longer bear the
disgrace of the peoples and no longer cause your nation to stumble, declares
the Lord GOD.”
The LORD’s Concern for His Holy Name
16[†]The word of the LORD came to me: 17
o “Son of man, when the house of
Israel lived in their own land, p they defiled it by their ways and their deeds.
Their ways before me were q like the uncleanness of a woman in her
menstrual impurity.
18So r I poured out my wrath upon them s for the blood
that they had shed in the land, for the idols t with which they had defiled it.
19 u I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through the
countries. v In accordance with their ways and their deeds I judged them.
20But when they came to the nations, wherever they came, w they profaned
my holy name, in that people said of them, ‘These are the people of the
LORD, and yet they had to go out of his land.’ 21But I had concern x for my
holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations to
which they came.
I Will Put My Spirit Within You
22[†]“Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: y It is
not for your sake, O house of Israel, that I am about to act, but for the sake
of my holy name, w which you have profaned among the nations to which
you came. 23
z And I will vindicate the holiness of my great name, which has
been profaned among the nations, and which you have profaned among
them. a And the nations will know that I am the LORD, declares the Lord
GOD, when through you I vindicate my holiness before their eyes. 24[†] b I
will take you c from the nations and gather you from all the countries and
d bring you into your own land. 25 e I will sprinkle clean water on you, and
you shall be clean from f all your uncleannesses, and g from all your idols
h I will cleanse you. 26[†]And I will give you i a new heart, and i a new
spirit I will put within you. i And I will remove the heart of stone from your
flesh and give you a heart of flesh. 27 j And I will put my Spirit within you,
i and cause you to walk in my statutes and k be careful to obey my rules. [1]
28[†] l You shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, and m you shall
be my people, and I will be your God. 29And n I will deliver you from all
your uncleannesses. And o I will summon the grain and make it abundant
and p lay no famine upon you. 30 q I will make the fruit of the tree and the
increase of the field abundant, o that you may never again suffer the
disgrace of famine among the nations. 31[†]Then r you will remember your
evil ways, and your deeds that were not good, and you will loathe
yourselves for your iniquities and your abominations. 32 y It is not for your
sake that I will act, declares the Lord GOD; let that be known to you. Be
ashamed and confounded for your ways, O house of Israel.
33[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: On the day that s I cleanse you from all
your iniquities, t I will cause the cities to be inhabited, and the waste places
shall be rebuilt. 34And the land that was desolate shall be tilled, instead of
being the desolation that it was in the sight of all who passed by.
35And they
will say, ‘This land that was desolate has become like u the garden of Eden,
and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are now fortified and
inhabited.’ 36Then v the nations that are left all around you shall know that I
am the LORD; I have rebuilt the ruined places and w replanted that which
was desolate. x I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it.
37“Thus says the Lord GOD: This also y I will let the house of Israel ask
me to do for them: z to increase their people like a a flock. 38Like the flock
for sacrifices, [2] b like the flock at Jerusalem during her appointed feasts, so
t shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of people. c Then they will know
that I am the LORD.”
The Valley of Dry Bones