EZEKIEL 14 [†]Then certain of the e elders of Israel came to me e and sat
before me. 2And the word of the LORD came to me: 3 f “Son of man, these
men have taken their idols into their hearts, and set g the stumbling block of
their iniquity before their faces. h Should I indeed let myself be consulted
by them? 4Therefore speak to them and say to them, Thus says the Lord
GOD: Any one of the house of Israel who takes his idols into his heart and
sets the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and yet comes to the
prophet, i I the LORD will answer him as he comes with the multitude of his
idols, 5 j that I may lay hold of the hearts of the house of Israel, k who are all
estranged from me through their idols.
6“Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: l Repent
and turn away from your idols, and turn away your faces from all your
abominations. 7For any one of the house of Israel, or of the strangers who
sojourn in Israel, k who separates himself from me, taking his idols into his
heart and putting the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and yet
comes to a prophet to consult me through him, m I the LORD will answer
him myself. 8And n I will set my face against that man; I o will make him a
sign and a byword n and cut him off from the midst of my people, p and you
shall know that I am the LORD.
9[†]And if the prophet is deceived and
speaks a word, q I, the LORD, have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch
out my hand against him and will destroy him from the midst of my people
Israel. 10And they shall bear their punishment [1]—the punishment of the
prophet and the punishment of the inquirer shall be alike— 11that the house
of Israel may no more go astray from me, nor r defile themselves anymore
with all their transgressions, s but that they may be my people and I may be
their God, declares the Lord GOD.”
Jerusalem Will Not Be Spared
12[†]And the word of the LORD came to me: 13 t “Son of man, when a land
sins against me u by acting faithlessly, and I stretch out my hand against it
and v break its supply [2] of bread and send famine upon it, and w cut off
from it man and beast, 14 x even if these three men, y Noah, z Daniel, and
a Job, were in it, b they would deliver but their own lives by their
righteousness, declares the Lord GOD.
15
c “If I cause wild beasts to pass through the land, and they ravage it,
d and it be made desolate, so that no one may pass through because of the
beasts, 16even if these three men were in it, e as I live, declares the Lord
GOD, they would deliver neither sons nor daughters. They alone would be
delivered, but f the land would be desolate.
17“Or g if I bring a sword upon that land and say, Let a sword pass
through the land, h and I cut off from it man and beast, 18 x though these
three men were in it, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, they would deliver
neither sons nor daughters, but they alone would be delivered.
19“Or i if I send a pestilence into that land and pour out my wrath upon it
with blood, to cut off from it man and beast, 20even if Noah, Daniel, and
Job were in it, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, they would deliver neither
son nor daughter. They would deliver but their own lives by their
righteousness.
21“For thus says the Lord GOD: How much more j when I send upon
Jerusalem my four disastrous acts of judgment, k sword, l famine, m wild
beasts, and n pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast! 22But behold,
o some survivors will be left in it, sons and daughters who will be brought
out; behold, when they come out to you, and p you see their ways and their
deeds, you will be consoled for the disaster that I have brought upon
Jerusalem, for all that I have brought upon it. 23They will console you,
when you see their ways and their deeds, and you shall know that I have not
done without cause all that I have done in it, declares the Lord GOD.”
Jerusalem, a Useless Vine