EZEKIEL 33 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2 t “Son of man, speak to
u your people and say to them, If v I bring the sword upon a land, and the
people of the land take a man from among them, and make him their
w watchman, 3and if he sees the sword coming upon the land and x blows
the trumpet and warns the people, 4then if anyone who hears the sound of
the trumpet does not take warning, and the sword comes and takes him
away, y his blood shall be upon his own head. 5 z He heard the sound of the
trumpet and did not take warning; his blood shall be upon himself. But if he
had taken warning, he would have saved his life. 6
a But if the watchman
sees the sword coming and does not blow the trumpet, so that the people are
not warned, and the sword comes and takes any one of them, a that person
is taken away in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at the watchman’s
hand.
7 b “So you, t son of man, I have made a watchman for the house of Israel.
b Whenever you hear a word from my mouth, you shall give them warning
from me. 8 c If I say to the wicked, O wicked one, you shall surely die, c and
you do not speak to warn the wicked to turn from his way, c that wicked
person shall die in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at your hand.
9
d But if you warn the wicked to turn from his way, and he does not turn
from his way, d that person shall die in his iniquity, e but you will have
delivered your soul.
Why Will You Die, Israel?
10“And you, f son of man, say to the house of Israel, Thus have you said:
‘Surely our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and g we rot away
because of them. h How then can we live?’ 11[†]Say to them, i As I live,
declares the Lord GOD, j I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way and live; k turn back, turn back from your
evil ways, k for why will you die, O house of Israel?
12 t “And you, son of man, say to l your people, m The righteousness of
the righteous shall not deliver him when he transgresses, n and as for the
wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall by it when he turns from his
wickedness, m and the righteous shall not be able to live by his
righteousness [1] when he sins. 13Though I say to the righteous that he shall
surely live, yet m if he trusts in his righteousness and does injustice, none of
his righteous deeds shall be remembered, but in his injustice that he has
done he shall die. 14Again, o though I say to the wicked, p ‘You shall surely
die,’ yet q if he turns from his sin and does what is just and right, 15if the
wicked r restores the pledge, s gives back what he has taken by robbery, and
walks t in the statutes of life, not doing injustice, he shall surely live; he
shall not die. 16 u None of the sins that he has committed shall be
remembered against him. He has done what is just and right; he shall surely
live.
17“Yet l your people say, v ‘The way of the Lord is not just,’ when it is
their own way that is not just. 18
w When the righteous turns from his
righteousness and does injustice, he shall die for it. 19And x when the
wicked turns from his wickedness and does what is just and right, he shall
live by this. 20Yet you say, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ O house of
Israel, y I will judge each of you according to his ways.”
Jerusalem Struck Down
21[†]In the z twelfth year a of our exile, in the tenth month, on the fifth day
of the month, b a fugitive from Jerusalem came to me and said, c “The city
has been struck down.” 22 d Now e the hand of the LORD had been upon me
the evening before the fugitive came; and he had opened my mouth by the
time the man came to me in the morning, so my mouth was opened, and I
was no longer mute.
23[†]The word of the LORD came to me: 24 f “Son of man, the inhabitants
of these g waste places in the land of Israel keep saying, h ‘Abraham was
only one man, yet he got possession of the land; but i we are many; the land
is surely given us to possess.’ 25[†]Therefore say to them, Thus says the
Lord GOD: j You eat flesh with the blood and k lift up your eyes to your
idols and l shed blood; shall you then possess the land? 26
m You rely on the
sword, n you commit abominations, and n each of you defiles his neighbor’s
wife; shall you then possess the land? 27Say this to them, Thus says the
Lord GOD: o As I live, surely those who are in p the waste places shall fall
by q the sword, and whoever is in the open field I will give to q the beasts to
be devoured, and those who are in r strongholds and in caves shall die by
q pestilence. 28
s And I will make the land a desolation and a waste, and t her
proud might shall come to an end, and u the mountains of Israel shall be so
desolate that none will pass through. 29 v Then they will know that I am the
LORD, when I have made the land a desolation and a waste because of all
their abominations that they have committed.
30[†]“As for you, f son of man, w your people who talk together about
you by the walls and at the doors of the houses, say to one another, each to
his brother, ‘Come, and hear what the word is that comes from the LORD.’
31 x And they come to you as people come, and they sit before you as my
people, and they hear what you say but they will not do it; for y with lustful
talk in their mouths they act; their heart is set on their gain. 32And behold,
you are to them like one who sings lustful songs with a beautiful voice and
z plays [2] well on an instrument, for a they hear what you say, but they will
not do it. 33 b When this comes—and come it will!— c then they will know
that a prophet has been among them.”
Prophecy Against the Shepherds of Israel