EZEKIEL 5 [†]“And you, a O son of man, take a b sharp sword. Use it as c a
barber’s razor and d pass it over your head and your beard. Then take
balances for weighing and divide the hair.
2 e A third part you shall burn in
the fire f in the midst of the city, g when the days of the siege are completed.
And a third part you shall take and strike with the sword all around the city.
h And a third part you shall scatter to the wind, and i I will unsheathe the
sword after them. 3
j And you shall take from these a small number and bind
them in the skirts of your robe. 4 k And of these again you shall take some
and cast them into the midst of the fire and burn them in the fire. From there
a fire will come out into all the house of Israel.
5[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: l This is Jerusalem. I have set her m in the
center of the nations, with countries all around her.
6And she has rebelled
against my rules by doing wickedness n more than the nations, and against
my statutes more than m the countries all around her; for they have rejected
my rules and have not walked in my statutes. 7Therefore thus says the Lord
GOD: Because you are o more turbulent than the nations that are all around
you, p and have not walked in my statutes or obeyed my rules, q and have
not [1] even acted according to the rules of the nations that are all around
you, 8[†]therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I, even I, r am against
you. s And I will execute judgments [2] in your midst t in the sight of the
nations. 9And because of all your abominations I will do with you u what I
have never yet done, and the like of which I will never do again.
10Therefore v fathers shall eat their sons in your midst, and sons shall eat
their fathers. s And I will execute judgments on you, w and any of you who
survive I will scatter to all the winds. 11[†]Therefore, x as I live, declares the
Lord GOD, surely, y because you have defiled my sanctuary z with all your
detestable things and with all your a abominations, b therefore I will
withdraw. [3] c My eye will not spare, and I will have no pity.
12
d A third
part of you shall die of pestilence and be consumed with famine in your
midst; d a third part shall fall by the sword all around you; d and a third part
I will scatter to all the winds and will unsheathe the sword after them.
13
e “Thus shall my anger spend itself, and I will vent my fury upon them
and satisfy myself. And they shall know that f I am the LORD—that I have
spoken in my jealousy— e when I spend my fury upon them. 14Moreover, I
will make you g a desolation and h an object of reproach among i the
nations all around you and in the sight of all who pass by.
15You shall be [4]
a reproach and a taunt, a warning j and a horror, to i the nations all around
you, k when I execute judgments on you in anger and fury, and l with
furious rebukes—I am the LORD; I have spoken— 16when I send against
you [5] m the deadly arrows of famine, arrows for destruction, which I will
send to destroy you, and when I bring more and more famine upon n you
and break your supply [6] of bread. 17I will send famine and o wild beasts
against you, p and they will rob you of your children. Pestilence and q blood
shall pass through you, and I will bring the sword upon you. I am the LORD;
I have spoken.”
Judgment Against Idolatry