EZEKIEL 47 [†]Then he brought me back to x the door of the temple, and
behold, y water was issuing from below z the threshold of the temple toward
the east (for the temple faced east). The water was flowing down from
below the south end of the threshold of the temple, south of a the altar.
2Then he brought me out by way of b the north gate and led me around on
the outside to c the outer gate that faces toward the east; and behold, the
water was trickling out on the south side.
3Going on eastward with a measuring line in his hand, d the man
measured a thousand cubits, [1] and then led me through the water, and it
was ankle-deep. 4Again he measured a thousand, and led me through the
water, and it was knee-deep. Again he measured a thousand, and led me
through the water, and it was waist-deep. 5Again he measured a thousand,
and it was a river that I could not pass through, for the water had risen. It
was deep enough to swim in, a river that could not be passed through. 6And
he said to me, e “Son of man, f have you seen this?”
Then he led me back to the bank of the river.
7As I went back, I saw on
the bank of the river g very many trees on the one side and on the other.
8[†]And he said to me, “This water flows toward the eastern region and
goes down into h the Arabah, and enters the sea; [2] when the water flows
into i the sea, the water will become fresh. [3] 9And wherever the river
goes, [4] every living creature that swarms will live, and there will be very
many fish. For this water goes there, that the waters of the sea [5] may
become fresh; so everything will live where the river goes. 10[†]Fishermen
will stand beside the sea. From j Engedi to k Eneglaim it will be a place for
the spreading of nets. Its fish will be of very many kinds, like the fish of
l the Great Sea. [6] 11[†]But its swamps and marshes will not become fresh;
they are to be left for salt. 12And on the banks, m on both sides of the river,
there will grow n all kinds of trees for food. o Their leaves will not wither,
nor their fruit fail, p but they will bear fresh fruit every month, because the
water for them flows from the sanctuary. Their fruit will be for food, and
p their leaves for healing.”
Division of the Land
13[†]Thus says the Lord GOD: “This is the boundary [7] by which q you shall
divide the land for inheritance among the twelve tribes of Israel. r Joseph
shall have two portions. 14And you shall divide equally what s I swore t to
give to your fathers. u This land shall fall to you as your inheritance.
15[†]“This shall be the boundary of the land: On the north side, from l the
Great Sea v by way of Hethlon to Lebo-hamath, and on to w Zedad, [8]
16
x Berothah, Sibraim (which lies on the border between y Damascus and
v Hamath), as far as Hazer-hatticon, which is on the border of Hauran. 17So
the boundary shall run from the sea to z Hazar-enan, which is on the
northern border of Damascus, with the border of Hamath to the north. [9]
This shall be the north side. [10]
18“On the east side, the boundary shall run between Hauran and
Damascus; along the Jordan between a Gilead and the land of Israel; to
b the eastern sea and as far as Tamar. [11] This shall be the east side.
19“On the south side, it shall run from c Tamar as far as d the waters of
Meribah-kadesh, from there along e the Brook of Egypt [12] to f the Great
Sea. This shall be the south side.
20“On the west side, the Great Sea shall be the boundary to a point
v opposite Lebo-hamath. This shall be the west side.
21[†] g “So you shall divide this land among you according to the tribes of
Israel. 22 h You shall allot it as an inheritance for yourselves and i for the
sojourners who reside among you and have had children among you. j They
shall be to you as native-born children of Israel. With you they shall be
allotted an inheritance among the tribes of Israel. 23In whatever tribe the
sojourner resides, there you shall assign him his inheritance, declares the
Lord GOD.