EZEKIEL 35 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2 f “Son of man, g set
your face h against i Mount Seir, and prophesy against it, 3and say to it,
Thus says the Lord GOD: j Behold, I am against you, Mount Seir, and k I
will stretch out my hand against you, l and I will make you a desolation and
a waste. 4 m I will lay your cities waste, and you shall become a desolation,
and you shall know that I am the LORD.
5[†]Because n you cherished
perpetual enmity and gave over the people of Israel to the power of the
sword o at the time of their calamity, p at the time of their final punishment,
6therefore, q as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will prepare you for blood,
and blood shall pursue you; r because you did not hate bloodshed, therefore
blood shall pursue you. 7 l I will make Mount Seir a waste m and a
desolation, and I will cut off from it s all who come and go. 8And I will fill
t its mountains with the slain. On your hills and in your valleys and in all
t your ravines u those slain with the sword shall fall. 9 l I will make you a
perpetual desolation, and m your cities shall not be inhabited. Then v you
will know that I am the LORD.
10[†]“Because you said, w ‘These two nations and these two countries
shall be mine, and x we will take possession of them’—although the y LORD
was there— 11therefore, q as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will deal with
you z according to the anger and z envy that you showed because of your
hatred against them. And a I will make myself known among them, when I
judge you. 12And you shall know that I am the LORD.
b “I have heard all the revilings that you uttered against the mountains of
Israel, saying, ‘They are laid desolate; c they are given us to devour.’ 13And
b you magnified yourselves against me d with your mouth, and multiplied
your words against me; I heard it. 14Thus says the Lord GOD: e While the
whole earth rejoices, I will make you desolate. 15As you f rejoiced over the
inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so I will deal
with you; you shall be desolate, g Mount Seir, and all Edom, all of it. Then
h they will know that I am the LORD.
Prophecy to the Mountains of Israel