EZEKIEL 31 [†] t In the eleventh year, in the third month, on the first day of
the month, the word of the LORD came to me: 2
u “Son of man, say to
Pharaoh king of Egypt and to v his multitude:
w “Whom are you like in your greatness?
3 Behold, x Assyria was a y cedar in z Lebanon,
with beautiful branches and a forest shade,
b and of towering height,
its top among the clouds. [1]
4 The waters nourished it;
the deep made it grow tall,
making c its rivers flow
around the place of its planting,
sending forth its streams
to all the trees of the field.
5 So d it towered high
above all the trees of the field;
its boughs grew large
and its branches long
from e abundant water in its shoots.
6 f All the birds of the heavens
made their nests in its boughs;
under its branches all the beasts of the field
gave birth to their young,
and under its shadow
lived all great nations.
7 It was g beautiful in its greatness,
in the length of its branches;
e for its roots went down
to abundant waters.
8[†] h The cedars i in the garden of God could not rival it,
nor the fir trees equal its boughs;
neither were the plane trees
like its branches;
no tree i in the garden of God
was its equal in beauty.
9 I made it beautiful
in the mass of its branches,
and all the trees of j Eden envied it,
that were in the garden of God.
10[†]“Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because k it [2] towered high and
set its top among the clouds, and l its heart was proud of its height, 11I will
give it into the hand of a mighty one of the nations. He shall surely deal
with it as its wickedness deserves. I have cast it out. 12 m Foreigners, m the
most ruthless of nations, have cut it down and left it. n On the mountains
and in all the valleys its branches have fallen, and its boughs have been
broken in all o the ravines of the land, and p all the peoples of the earth have
gone away from its shadow and left it. 13 q On its fallen trunk dwell all the
birds of the heavens, and on its branches are all the beasts of the field.
14 r All this is in order that no trees by the waters may grow to towering
height or set their tops among the clouds, and that no trees that drink water
may reach up to them in height. For they are all given over to death, s to the
world t below, among the children of man, [3] with those who go down to
the pit.
15“Thus says the Lord GOD: On the day u the cedar [4] went down to
Sheol I caused mourning; I closed the deep over it, and restrained its rivers,
and many waters were stopped. I clothed Lebanon in gloom for it, and all
the trees of the field fainted because of it. 16
v I made the nations quake at
the sound of its fall, u when I cast it down to Sheol with those who go down
to the pit. w And all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all
that drink water, x were comforted in the world below.
17They also went
down to Sheol with it, y to those who are slain by the sword; yes, z those
who were its arm, a who lived under its shadow among the nations.
18 b “Whom are you thus like in glory and in greatness w among the trees
of Eden? c You shall be brought down with w the trees of Eden to the world
below. d You shall lie among the uncircumcised, y with those who are slain
by the sword.
b “This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, declares the Lord GOD.”
A Lament over Pharaoh and Egypt