EZEKIEL 30 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] v “Son of man,
prophesy, and say, Thus says the Lord GOD:
w “Wail, ‘Alas for the day!’
3 w For the day is near,
x the day of the LORD is near;
it will be y a day of clouds,
a time of doom for [1] the nations.
4 z A sword shall come upon Egypt,
a and anguish shall be in b Cush,
when the slain fall in Egypt,
and c her wealth [2] is carried away,
and d her foundations are torn down.
5 b Cush, and e Put, and Lud, and f all Arabia, and Libya, [3] and the people
of the land that is in league, [4] shall fall with them by the sword.
6 “Thus says the LORD:
g Those who support Egypt shall fall,
and h her proud might shall come down;
i from Migdol to Syene
they shall fall within her by the sword,
declares the Lord GOD.
7 j And they shall be desolated in the midst of desolated countries,
and their cities shall be in the midst of cities that are laid waste.
8
k Then they will know that I am the LORD,
when l I have set fire to Egypt,
and g all her helpers are broken.
9“On that day m messengers shall go out from me in ships to terrify the
unsuspecting b people of Cush, and a anguish shall come upon them on the
day of Egypt’s doom; [5] for, behold, it comes!
10“Thus says the Lord GOD:
n “I will put an end to the wealth of Egypt,
by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.
11 He and his people with him, o the most ruthless of nations,
shall be brought in to destroy the land,
z and they shall draw their swords against Egypt
and fill the land with the slain.
12 And p I will q dry up the Nile
and will sell the land into the hand of r evildoers;
s I will bring desolation upon the land and everything in it,
by the hand of t foreigners;
u I am the LORD; I have spoken.
13[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD:
v “I will destroy the idols
and put an end to the images in w Memphis;
x there shall no longer be a prince from the land of Egypt;
so y I will put fear in the land of Egypt.
14 I will make z Pathros a desolation
and will set fire to a Zoan
b and will execute judgments on c Thebes.
15 And I will pour out my wrath on Pelusium,
the stronghold of Egypt,
and cut off the multitude [6] of Thebes.
16 And I will set fire to Egypt;
Pelusium shall be in great agony;
Thebes shall be breached,
and w Memphis shall face enemies [7] by day.
17 The young men of On and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword,
and the women [8] shall go into captivity.
18 At d Tehaphnehes e the day shall be dark,
when I break there the yoke bars of Egypt,
and f her proud might shall come to an end in her;
she shall be covered by a cloud,
and her daughters shall go into captivity.
19 Thus g I will execute judgments on Egypt.
h Then they will know that I am the LORD.”
Egypt Shall Fall to Babylon
20[†] i In the eleventh year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the
month, the word of the LORD came to me: 21 j “Son of man, k I have broken
the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and behold, l it has not been bound up, to
heal it by binding it with a bandage, so that it may become strong to wield
the sword. 22Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against
Pharaoh king of Egypt and m will break his arms, both the strong arm and
the one that was broken, and I will make the sword fall from his hand.
23[†] n I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them
through the countries. 24And o I will strengthen the arms of the king of
Babylon and put p my sword in his hand, but I will break the arms of
Pharaoh, and he will groan before him q like a man mortally wounded. 25I
will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, but the arms of Pharaoh
shall fall. r Then they shall know that I am the LORD, s when I put my sword
into the hand of the king of Babylon and he stretches it out against the land
of Egypt. 26And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse
them throughout the countries. Then they will know that I am the LORD.”
Pharaoh to Be Slain