EZEKIEL 26 [†] i In the eleventh year, on the first day of the month, the word
of the LORD came to me: 2 j “Son of man, because k Tyre said concerning
Jerusalem, l ‘Aha, the gate of the peoples is broken; it has swung open to
me. I shall be replenished, now that she is laid waste,’ 3[†]therefore thus
says the Lord GOD: m Behold, I am against you, O Tyre, and will bring up
n many nations against you, o as the sea brings up its waves. 4[†]They shall
destroy the walls of Tyre and break down her towers, and I will scrape her
soil from her and p make her a bare rock. 5She q shall be in the midst of the
sea a place for the spreading of nets, r for I have spoken, declares the Lord
GOD. And she shall become plunder for the nations, 6[†]and her daughters
on the mainland shall be killed by the sword. s Then they will know that I
am the LORD.
7“For thus says the Lord GOD: t Behold, I will bring against Tyre u from
the north Nebuchadnezzar [1] king of Babylon, v king of kings, with horses
and chariots, and with horsemen and a host of many soldiers. 8He will kill
with the sword w your daughters on the mainland. x He will set up a siege
wall against you and throw up a mound against you, and raise y a roof of
shields against you. 9
z He will direct the shock of his battering rams against
your walls, and with his axes he will break down your towers. 10His horses
will be so many that their dust will cover you. Your walls will shake at the
noise of the horsemen and wagons and chariots, when he enters your gates
as men enter a city that has been breached. 11With the hoofs of his horses he
will trample all your streets. He will kill your people with the sword, and
your mighty pillars will fall to the ground. 12[†]They will plunder a your
riches and loot a your merchandise. They will break down your walls and
destroy your pleasant houses. Your stones and timber and b soil they will
cast into the midst of the waters. 13
c And I will stop the music of your
songs, and d the sound of your lyres shall be heard no more. 14[†] p I will
make you a bare rock. q You shall be a place for the spreading of nets. You
shall never be rebuilt, r for I am the LORD; I have spoken, declares the Lord
GOD.
15“Thus says the Lord GOD to Tyre: Will not e the coastlands shake at the
sound of your fall, f when the wounded groan, when slaughter is made in
your midst? 16Then all g the princes of the sea will step down from their
thrones and h remove their robes and strip off their embroidered garments.
They will clothe themselves with trembling; i they will sit on the ground
and j tremble every moment and k be appalled at you. 17And they will l raise
a lamentation over you and say to you,
“‘How you have perished,
you who were inhabited from the seas,
O city renowned,
m who was mighty on the sea;
she and her inhabitants n imposed their terror
on all her inhabitants!
18 Now the coastlands tremble
on the day of your fall,
and the coastlands that are on the sea
are dismayed at your passing.’
19[†]“For thus says the Lord GOD: When I make you a city laid waste,
like the cities that are not inhabited, o when I bring up the deep over you,
and the great waters cover you, 20then p I will make you go down with
those who go down to the pit, to the people of old, and I will make you to
dwell in the world below, among ruins from of old, p with those who go
down to the pit, so that you will not be inhabited; but I will set beauty q in
the land of the living. 21I will bring you r to a dreadful end, and you shall be
no more. s Though you be sought for, you will never be found again,
declares the Lord GOD.”
A Lament for Tyre