EZEKIEL 21 [†] [1] The word of the LORD came to me: 2 t “Son of man, u set
your face toward Jerusalem and v preach against the sanctuaries. [2]
Prophesy against the land of Israel 3[†]and say to the land of Israel, Thus
says the LORD: w Behold, I am against you and will draw x my sword from
its sheath and y will cut off from you both righteous and wicked. 4Because I
will cut off from you both righteous and wicked, therefore my sword shall
be drawn from its sheath against all flesh from south to north. 5 z And all
flesh shall know that I am the LORD. I have drawn x my sword from its
sheath; a it shall not be sheathed again.
6[†]“As for you, son of man, b groan; with breaking heart and bitter grief,
c groan before their eyes. 7 d And when they say to you, ‘Why do you
groan?’ you shall say, ‘Because of the news e that it is coming. f Every heart
will melt, and g all hands will be feeble; every spirit will faint, and g all
knees will be weak as water. h Behold, it is e coming, and it will be
fulfilled,’” declares the Lord GOD.
8[†]And the word of the LORD came to me: 9
t “Son of man, prophesy and
say, Thus says the Lord, say:
i “A sword, a sword is sharpened
and also polished,
10
j sharpened for slaughter,
j polished to flash like lightning!
(Or k shall we rejoice? You have despised the rod, my son, l with everything
of wood.) [3] 11So the sword is given to be polished, that it may be grasped
in the hand. It is sharpened and polished m to be given into the hand of the
slayer.
12[†] n Cry out and wail, son of man, for it is against my people. It is
against all the princes of Israel. They are delivered over to the sword with
my people. o Strike therefore upon your thigh. 13For it will not be a testing
—what could it do if you despise p the rod?” [4] declares the Lord GOD.
14[†]“As for you, q son of man, prophesy. r Clap your hands and let the
sword come down twice, s yes, three times, [5] the sword for those to be
slain. It is the sword for the great slaughter, which surrounds them, 15that
their hearts may melt, and many stumble. [6] At all their gates I have given
the glittering sword. Ah, it is made like lightning; t it is taken up [7] for
slaughter.
16Cut sharply to the right; set yourself to the left, wherever your
face is directed. 17I also will r clap my hands, u and I will satisfy my fury;
v I the LORD have spoken.”
18[†]The word of the LORD came to me again: 19“As for you, son of man,
mark two ways for w the sword of the king of Babylon to come. Both of
them shall come from the same land. And make x a signpost; make it x at
the head of the way to a city.
20Mark a way y for the sword to come to
Rabbah of the Ammonites and to Judah, into Jerusalem the fortified. 21For
the king of Babylon stands z at the parting of the way, at the head of the two
ways, to use divination. He shakes the arrows; he consults a the teraphim; [8]
he looks at the liver.
22Into his right hand comes the divination for
Jerusalem, b to set battering rams, to open the mouth with murder, to lift up
the voice with shouting, to set battering rams against the gates, c to cast up
mounds, to build siege towers. 23But to them it will seem like a false
divination. d They have sworn solemn oaths, but he brings their guilt to
remembrance, e that they may be taken.
24[†]“Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because you have made your
guilt to be remembered, in that your transgressions are uncovered, so that in
all your deeds your sins appear—because you have come to remembrance,
f you shall be taken in hand. 25And you, O profane [9] g wicked one, prince
of Israel, h whose day has come, i the time of your final punishment, 26thus
says the Lord GOD: Remove the turban and take off the crown. Things shall
not remain as they are. j Exalt that which is low, and bring low that which is
exalted. 27A ruin, ruin, ruin I will make it. k This also shall not be, l until he
comes, the one to whom judgment belongs, and I will give it to him.
28“And you, m son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus says the Lord GOD
n concerning the Ammonites and concerning their reproach; say, o A sword,
a sword p is drawn for the slaughter. o It is polished to consume and to flash
like lightning— 29while q they see for you false visions, while they divine
lies for you—to place you on the necks of the profane wicked, r whose day
has come, the time of their final punishment. 30[†] p Return it to its sheath.
In the place where you were created, in the land of your origin, s I will
judge you. 31And t I will pour out my indignation upon you; u I will blow
upon you with the fire of my wrath, and I will deliver you into the hands of
v brutish men, skillful to destroy.
32You shall be fuel for the fire. Your blood
shall be in the midst of the land. w You shall be no more remembered, x for I
the LORD have spoken.”
Israel’s Shedding of Blood