EZEKIEL 11 [†] s The Spirit lifted me up and brought me to t the east gate of
the house of the LORD, which faces east. And behold, at the entrance of the
gateway there were u twenty-five men. And I saw among them Jaazaniah
v the son of Azzur, and w Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people.
2[†]And he said to me, x “Son of man, these are the men who devise
iniquity and who give wicked counsel in this city; 3 y who say, z ‘The time is
not near [1] to build houses. a This city is the cauldron, and we are the meat.’
4Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man.”
5And b the Spirit of the LORD fell upon me, and he said to me, “Say, Thus
says the LORD: So you think, O house of Israel. c For I know the things that
come into your mind. 6
d You have multiplied your slain in this city and
have filled its streets with the slain. 7[†]Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
e Your slain whom you have laid in the midst of it, a they are the meat, and
a this city is the cauldron, but you shall be brought out of the midst of it.
8 f You have feared the sword, and I will bring the sword upon you, declares
the Lord GOD.
9And I will bring you out of the midst of it, and g give you
into the hands of foreigners, and h execute judgments upon you. 10
i You
shall fall by the sword. I will judge you at the border of Israel, j and you
shall know that I am the LORD.
11 k This city shall not be your cauldron, nor
shall you be the meat in the midst of it. I will judge you at the border of
Israel, 12and you shall know that I am the LORD. For you have not walked in
my statutes, nor obeyed my rules, l but have acted according to the rules of
the nations that are around you.”
13[†]And it came to pass, while I was prophesying, m that n Pelatiah the
son of Benaiah died. o Then I fell down on my face and cried out with a
loud voice and said, o “Ah, Lord GOD! p Will you make a full end of the
remnant of Israel?”
Israel’s New Heart and Spirit
14[†]And the word of the LORD came to me: 15
q “Son of man, your brothers,
even your brothers, your kinsmen, [2] the whole house of Israel, all of them,
are those of whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, r ‘Go far from the
LORD; to us this land is given for a possession.’ 16Therefore say, ‘Thus says
the Lord GOD: Though I removed them far off among the nations, and
though I scattered them among the countries, yet s I have been a sanctuary
to them for a while [3] in the countries where they have gone.’ 17Therefore
say, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD: t I will gather you from the peoples and
assemble you out of the countries where you have been scattered, t and I
will give you the land of Israel.’ 18And when they come there, u they will
remove from it all its v detestable things and all its abominations. 19 w And I
will give them one heart, and x a new spirit I will put within them. y I will
remove the heart of stone from their flesh z and give them a heart of flesh,
20 a that they may walk in my statutes and keep my rules and obey them.
b And they shall be my people, and I will be their God. 21
c But as for those
whose heart goes after their detestable things and their abominations, d I
will [4] bring their deeds upon their own heads, declares the Lord GOD.”
22[†] e Then the cherubim lifted up their wings, with the wheels beside
them, e and the glory of the God of Israel was over them. 23And the glory of
the LORD went up from the midst of the city and f stood on the mountain
that is on the east side of the city.
24
g And the Spirit lifted me up and
brought me h in the vision by the Spirit of God i into Chaldea, to the exiles.
Then the vision that I had seen went up from me. 25And I told the exiles all
the things that the LORD had shown me.
Judah’s Captivity Symbolized