EZRA 5 [†]Now the prophets, a Haggai and b Zechariah the son of Iddo,
prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem, in the name of the
God of Israel who was over them. 2
c Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel
and d Jeshua the son of Jozadak arose and began to rebuild the house of
God that is in Jerusalem, and the prophets of God were e with them,
supporting them.
3[†]At the same time f Tattenai the governor of the province Beyond the
River and Shethar-bozenai and their associates came to them and spoke to
them thus: g “Who gave you a decree to build this house and to finish this
structure?” 4They [1] also asked them this: “What are the names of the men
who are building this building?” 5But h the eye of their God was on the
elders of the Jews, and they did not stop them until the report should reach
Darius and then an answer be returned by letter concerning it.
Tattenai’s Letter to King Darius
6[†]This is a copy of the letter that f Tattenai the governor of the province
Beyond the River and Shethar-bozenai and his associates, the i governors
who were in the province Beyond the River, sent to Darius the king. 7They
sent him a report, in which was written as follows: “To Darius the king, all
peace. 8[†]Be it known to the king that we went to the province of Judah, to
the house of the great God. It is being built with huge stones, and timber is
laid in the walls. This work goes on diligently and prospers in their hands.
9Then we asked those elders and spoke to them thus: g ‘Who gave you a
decree to build this house and to finish this structure?’ 10We also asked
them their names, for your information, that we might write down the
names of their leaders. [2] 11[†]And this was their reply to us: ‘We are the
servants of the God of heaven and earth, and we are rebuilding the house
that was built many years ago, j which a great king of Israel built and
k finished. 12[†] l But because our fathers had angered the God of heaven, he
m gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the
Chaldean, who destroyed this house and carried away the people to
Babylonia. 13[†] n However, in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon,
Cyrus the king made a decree that this house of God should be rebuilt.
14[†] o And the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple that was in Jerusalem and
brought into the temple of Babylon, these Cyrus the king took out of the
temple of Babylon, and they were delivered to one whose name was
p Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor; 15and he said to him, “Take
these vessels, go and put them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the
house of God be rebuilt on its site.” 16[†]Then this p Sheshbazzar came and
q laid the foundations of the house of God that is in Jerusalem, and from
that time until now it has been in building, and it is r not yet finished.’
17Therefore, if it seems good to the king, s let search be made in the royal
archives there in Babylon, to see whether a decree was issued by Cyrus the
king for the rebuilding of this house of God in Jerusalem. And let the king
send us his pleasure in this matter.”
The Decree of Darius