EZRA 10 [†] j While Ezra prayed and k made confession, weeping and
l casting himself down m before the house of God, a very great assembly of
men, women, and children, gathered to him out of Israel, for the people
wept bitterly.
2[†]And Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, of the sons of Elam,
addressed Ezra: n “We have broken faith with our God and have married
foreign women from the peoples of the land, but even now there is hope for
Israel in spite of this. 3[†]Therefore o let us make a covenant with our God
to put away all these wives and p their children, according to the counsel of
my lord [1] and of q those who tremble at the commandment of our God, and
let it be done r according to the Law.
4Arise, for it is your task, and we are
with you; s be strong and do it.” 5Then Ezra arose and made the leading
priests and Levites and all Israel t take an oath that they would do as had
been said. So they took the oath.
6Then Ezra withdrew u from before the house of God and went to the
v chamber of w Jehohanan the son of x Eliashib, where he spent the night, [2]
neither y eating bread nor drinking water, for he was mourning over the
faithlessness of the exiles. 7[†]And a proclamation was made throughout
Judah and Jerusalem to all the returned exiles that they should assemble at
Jerusalem, 8and that if anyone did not come within three days, by order of
the officials and the elders all his property should be forfeited, and he
himself banned from the congregation of the exiles.
9[†]Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin assembled at Jerusalem
within the three days. It was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of the
month. And all the people sat in the open square before the house of God,
trembling because of this matter and because of the z heavy rain. 10[†]And
Ezra the priest stood up and said to them, “You have broken faith and
married foreign women, and so increased the guilt of Israel. 11[†]Now then
a make confession to the LORD, the God of your fathers and do his will.
b Separate yourselves from the peoples of the land and from the foreign
wives.” 12Then all the assembly answered with a loud voice, “It is so; we
must do as you have said. 13But the people are many, and it is a time of
heavy rain; we cannot stand in the open. Nor is this a task for one day or for
two, for we have greatly transgressed in this matter.
14[†]Let our officials
stand for the whole assembly. Let all in our cities who have taken foreign
wives come c at appointed times, and with them the elders and judges of
every city, d until the fierce wrath of our God over this matter is turned
away from us.” 15Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of
Tikvah opposed this, and e Meshullam and f Shabbethai the Levite
supported them.
16[†]Then the returned exiles did so. Ezra the priest selected men, [3]
heads of fathers’ houses, according to their fathers’ houses, each of them
designated by name. On the first day of the tenth month they sat down to
examine the matter; 17and by the first day of the first month they had come
to the end of all the men who had married foreign women.
Those Guilty of Intermarriage
18[†]Now there were found some of the sons of the priests who had married
foreign women: Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib, and Gedaliah, some of the sons of
g Jeshua the son of Jozadak and his brothers. 19They h pledged themselves
to put away their wives, and their guilt offering was i a ram of the flock for
their guilt. [4] 20 j Of the sons of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah. 21 k Of the
sons of Harim: Maaseiah, Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel, and Uzziah. 22Of the
sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and
Elasah.
23Of the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah (that is, Kelita), Pethahiah,
Judah, and Eliezer.
24Of the singers: Eliashib. Of the gatekeepers: Shallum,
Telem, and Uri.
25And of Israel: of the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malchijah,
Mijamin, Eleazar, Hashabiah, [5] and Benaiah. 26Of the sons of Elam:
Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth, and Elijah. 27Of the sons of
Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Jeremoth, Zabad, and Aziza. 28Of the
sons of Bebai were Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai. 29Of the sons
of Bani were Meshullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Jashub, Sheal, and Jeremoth.
30Of the sons of Pahath-moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah,
Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui, and Manasseh. 31Of the l sons of Harim:
Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, 32Benjamin, Malluch, and
Shemariah. 33Of the sons of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet,
Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei. 34Of the sons of m Bani: Maadai, Amram,
Uel, 35Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhi, 36Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
37Mattaniah, Mattenai, Jaasu. 38Of the sons of Binnui: [6] Shimei,
39Shelemiah, Nathan, Adaiah, 40Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, 41Azarel,
Shelemiah, Shemariah, 42Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph. 43Of the sons of
Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, and Benaiah. 44All
these had married foreign women, and some of the women n had even borne
children. [7]
Study Notes for Ezra
1:1–2:70 Cyrus’ s Decree and the Return of Exiles from Babylon. Ezra
describes monumental political changes in the world as God’s special work
for his people.
1:1–4 The Decree. In the famous Cyrus Cylinder, Cyrus boasts that those “of
the holy cities beyond the Tigris whose sanctuaries had been in ruins over a
long period . . . I returned to their places.” Ezra 1 reflects that proclamation as
it affected the Jews.
EZRA—NOTE ON 1:1 the first year of Cyrus. The story of Ezra continues from
Chronicles (see 2 Chron. 36:22–23). might be fulfilled. Jeremiah had
predicted an exile lasting 70 years, after which Babylon would be punished and
Judah would be restored to its land (see Jer. 25:11–14; 32:36–38). the LORD
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus. God’s hand was behind all the events of the
book (see Ezra 1:5; 3:11; 5:5; 6:22; 7:6, 9; 8:18, 22; 10:14). On Cyrus’s role,
see also Isa. 44:28; 45:1.
EZRA—NOTE ON 1:2 God of heaven is used elsewhere as a title for the Lord
when Jews relate to non-Jews (see 5:12). Cyrus uses diplomatic language
typical of the time.
EZRA—NOTE ON 1:3–4 he is the God who is in Jerusalem. No doubt this is
Cyrus’s real view, although he is not necessarily claiming there is only one God
(compare Darius’s statement in 6:12). Go up to Jerusalem describes worship
in the temple. The focus of the decree is on the rebuilding of the temple more
than on the exiles returning. let each survivor . . . be assisted by the men of
his place. Cyrus decrees that the people of his kingdom should supply the
returning exiles with what they need for the rebuilding (compare Ex. 12:35–
36).
FACT
Cyrus the Great was the founder of the largest empire the ancient Near East
had seen thus far. He conquered much of Southwest and Central Asia, and
reigned for 30 years. He was a strong military leader and a shrewd politician.
Any people group he conquered was allowed to maintain its own customs
and religion, so long as they swore loyalty to Persia, paid taxes, and did not
rebel.
1:5–11 The Exiles Respond to the Decree. The exiles’ leaders gather money
and materials for the temple. Cyrus brings the items taken from the temple in
586 B.C. for the people to take back to Jerusalem.
EZRA—NOTE ON 1:5 The heads of the fathers’ houses (extended families) and
priests spearhead the response. The three tribes—Judah, Benjamin, and the
Levites—had inhabited the former kingdom of Judah. They were taken off to
Babylon in 586 B.C. No mention is made here or elsewhere of any large-scale
return of other tribes, though a few people from other tribes are sometimes
mentioned or implied (see 1 Chron. 9:3; Luke 2:36). The OT gives no further
information on the fate of the other tribes.
EZRA—NOTE ON 1:6–11 The people of Persia help the Jewish exiles as their
king commands. Cyrus gives back the vessels of the house of the LORD (v. 7),
stolen from the temple in the Babylonian invasion (2 Kings 25:13–17). The
title prince of Judah (Ezra 1:8) simply means he was a leader of the exiles.
2:1–70 The Exiles Live Again in Their Ancestral Homes. This long chapter tells
of the exiles’ return from Babylon to resettle in their former homes in
Jerusalem and Judah. (The information in ch. 2 is given again in Neh. 7:6–73
in connection with a covenant renewal under Nehemiah.) It shows that the
exiled Judeans responded to Cyrus’s decree and saw it as a fulfillment of
prophecy. The return is not just the end of the exile but also a reoccupation of
the ancient Israelite homeland.
Chronology of Ezra
Event Year Reference
Cyrus king of Persia captures Babylon 539 B.C. Dan. 5:30–31
First year of King Cyrus; issues proclamation freeing Jewish exiles to return 538–537 Ezra 1:1–4
Jewish exiles, led by Sheshbazzar, return from Babylon to Jerusalem 537? Ezra 1:11
Altar rebuilt 537 Ezra 3:1–2
Temple rebuilding begins Adversaries oppose the rebuilding Temple rebuilding ceases Temple rebuilding resumes (2nd year of Darius) Temple construction completed (6th year of Darius) Ezra departs from Babylon to Jerusalem (arrives in 7th year of Artaxerxes) Men of Judah and Benjamin assemble at Jerusalem Officials conduct three-month investigation 536 Ezra 3:8
536–530 Ezra 4:1–5
530–520 Ezra 4:24
520 Ezra 5:2; compare Hag. 1:14
516 Ezra 6:15
458 Ezra 7:6–9
458 Ezra 10:9
458–457 Ezra 10:16–17
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:2b–35 The laity is described partly by kinship (vv. 2b–19)
and partly by place (vv. 20–35), without a real distinction (the men of and the
sons of seem interchangeable). The places named are in Judah and Benjamin
(see 1:5), north and south of Jerusalem, with a larger group in Benjamin (see
Josh. 18:21–27).
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:2a Zerubbabel descended from King Jehoiachin (see 1
Chron. 3:16–19, where Jehoiachin is called Jeconiah). Jehoiachin was exiled in
597 B.C. and was later given a place in the Babylonian court (2 Kings 24:15;
25:27–30; see also Hag. 2:23). The Nehemiah named here is not the one who
later rebuilt Jerusalem’s walls; he came to Jerusalem almost a century after
these first returnees. The Mordecai of Esther was also much later, and did not
return to Jerusalem.
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:36–58 Temple officials are divided by function, headed by
the priests and Levites. The priests (vv. 36–39) are most important, set apart
for worship at the altar. The Levites are attendants, some of them singers and
gatekeepers (vv. 40–42; see also 1 Chron. 6:33–43; 9:17–18).
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:43–54 The temple servants were officials appointed by
King David to help the Levites (see 8:20).
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:55–58 The sons of Solomon’s servants may be connected
with foreigners whom Solomon drafted for building the temple (1 Kings 9:20–
21). They are not regarded as slaves.
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:59–63 whether they belonged to Israel. People were
coming back after a long exile to claim inheritance and property, so credentials
needed to be established. excluded from the priesthood. Only priests from the
correct lineage could serve at the altar. a priest to consult. The claims entered
here are not permanently refused, but are investigated further before a ruling is
made.
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:68 The location of the former temple is regarded as a holy
place, so it can already be called the house of the LORD that is in Jerusalem.
EZRA—NOTE ON 2:69 Darics were gold coins used throughout the Persian
Empire. Archaeologists have found darics bearing the name of the Persian
province Yehud, probably indicating that the returned Jews were allowed to
mint their own coins. Yehud was the Persian name for Judah (or Judea; see
9:9); it was within a larger province called Beyond the River (see 4:10; and
note on 4:1–2).
FACT
Darics (2:69) were gold coins used throughout the Persian Empire. These
coins were often called “archers” because of the image of an archer stamped
on the face. When one particular king remarked that 30,000 archers had run
him out of his kingdom, he was implying that he had been bribed to give up
his throne.
EZRA—NOTE ON 3:1–6:22 The Returned Exiles Rebuild the Temple on Its
Original Site. The book of Ezra spans several generations. The returnees begin
rebuilding, encounter resistance, and finally receive renewed permission to
rebuild.
3:1–13 The Foundations of the Temple Are Laid. The altar is rebuilt on its
former site, and foundations are laid for the new temple.
EZRA—NOTE ON 3:1 The seventh month, Tishri (roughly September), was the
month of the Day of Atonement (Lev. 23:26–32), followed by the Feast of
Booths (or Tabernacles; Lev. 23:33–43), celebrating the exodus from Egypt.
Thus, in the first year of their return, the people make their first pilgrimage to
Jerusalem.
EZRA—NOTE ON 3:2 built the altar. The broken altar had to be rebuilt so
sacrifices could once again be made.
EZRA—NOTE ON 3:3 in its place. There may have been visible remains of the
original altar (perhaps implied by Jer. 41:4–5). In any case, its exact location
was evidently known. It is possible the exiles hurried to build the altar because
they feared the peoples of the lands—residents of Judah, and perhaps
neighboring areas, who were not part of the returned exiles. Some may have
had Jewish origins, but they appear to be a distinct group and would soon
oppose the work.
EZRA—NOTE ON 3:4–7 For the Feast of Booths, see Num. 29:12–38.
EZRA—NOTE ON 3:8 Work begins with laying the foundation in the second year
of the return (c. 537 B.C.). The second month, Ziv (1 Kings 6:1), is in the
spring, the same time of year when Solomon had begun his temple (2 Chron.
3:2). The return from exile is dated starting after their coming to the house of
God at Jerusalem. Even though the temple still lies in ruins, the place could
be called “the house of God” because it had been consecrated for worship (see
Jer. 41:5).
FACT
Joppa was 35 miles (56 km) northwest of Jeru-salem on the Mediterranean
Sea and was a major seaport. Joppa had the only natural harbor in all of
Palestine. Though the surrounding reefs made it dangerous for ships to enter
the harbor, it was still greatly valued because of its strategic location for
trade with the west.
EZRA—NOTE ON 3:12–13 But many . . . wept with a loud voice. Some of the
older people remembered the former temple and believed this new one would
not match its glory.
4:1–24 Enemies Stall the Project by Conspiring against It. The rebuilding
project encounters opposition from other groups in the region, and the work
ceases.
Adversaries Hinder Work
Ezra 4:5 Ezra 4:6 Ezra 4:7–23 The people of the land hired counselors to work against the Israelites from the reigns of Cyrus (539–530 B.C.) to Darius
(522–486)
Accusations arose during the reign of Xerxes (Ahasuerus) (486–464)
Accusations arose during the reign of Artaxerxes (464–423):
• First threat: they will withhold money (v. 13)
• Second threat: the king is dishonored (v. 14)
• Third threat: they have rebelled before (v. 15)
• Fourth threat: they will take over the whole area (v. 16)
Ezra 4:24–
6:12 Work on the temple stopped from 536–520; Darius finally gives order to rebuild it
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:1–2 the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin. The area
where the returned exiles lived was officially a Persian province called
Beyond the River (v. 10; that is, beyond the Euphrates from the perspective of
Persia). Its administrative center was in Samaria, the capital of the former
northern kingdom of Israel. Its population was largely descended from peoples
settled there by Esarhaddon king of Assyria (see 2 Kings 17:24–33). Assyria
had been resettling exiles from other lands in this area since Judah was
conquered in 722 B.C. Let us build with you, for we worship your God as
you do. Indeed, a priest had been sent to teach these peoples’ ancestors the
religion of Yahweh (2 Kings 17:24–28), though the account in 2 Kings reports
that they worshiped other gods as well (2 Kings 17:29–41).
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:3 we alone will build to the LORD. Their stated reason for
refusing the offer of help was that Cyrus’s decree applied only to the returning
exiles. No doubt they also understood that the actual intent of the offer was to
sabotage the project.
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:4–5 The real attitude of these residents, now called the
people of the land, becomes clear. They showed their opposition all the days
of Cyrus . . . even until the reign of Darius, that is, right up to the completion
of the temple in 516 B.C. They apparently turned local officials against the
project. Even though the project had the full authority of King Cyrus, these
local enemies took advantage of the distance of Jerusalem from the imperial
capital in Persia.
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:6–23 This section interrupts the historical narrative (1:1–
4:5), which resumes at 4:24.
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:6 This verse jumps forward to events during the reign of
Ahasuerus (also called Xerxes, 486–464 B.C.), a key figure in the book of
Esther (see Est. 1:1).
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:7–23 The author jumps forward again to another hostile
episode, when leaders in the province sent a formal letter of complaint to King
Artaxerxes I (reigned 464–423 B.C.).
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:7–8 The occasion of this letter against the Jewish
community is not known, but apparently the people had attempted to rebuild
the city walls even before the arrival of Nehemiah in 445 B.C. The letter was in
Aramaic, the language used by Persian diplomats. When the letter is
introduced (v. 7b), the language changes from Hebrew to Aramaic until 6:18. It
returns to Hebrew from 6:19 to the end of the book. Citing the letters in
Aramaic gives authenticity to Ezra’s account.
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:9–10 The people sending the letter give their names,
professions, and national origins. Their ancestors were among the foreigners
brought in by the conquering Assyrians to resettle the northern kingdom of
Israel after 722 B.C.
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:11 Beyond the River. See note on 4:1–2.
FACT
Beyond the River was the name given by Persian rulers to their province that
included Judah and Israel (4:11). The “River” refers to the Euphrates River,
running through present-day Iraq. From the perspective of people living in
Persia, Israel was indeed “beyond the river.”
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:12 that rebellious and wicked city. Actually, the kings of
Israel and Judah had often sought compromise with their Assyrian and Bab­ ylo-
nian oppressors. The writers of this letter assume that the Persian rulers will be
easily convinced that the returned exiles are ready to rebel.
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:13–16 The threat of an independence movement in
Jerusalem is exaggerated. The imperial records would include those of Assyria
and Babylon.
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:17–22 The king allowed the work of rebuilding to be
stopped by force. This may explain why it was later reported that the walls of
Jerusalem lay in ruins (Neh. 1:3).
EZRA—NOTE ON 4:24 The word then picks up the story from v. 5, going back to
the period soon after the first return. It is implied that the temple rebuilding had
ceased soon after it began, within about two years after c. 537 B.C. (see 3:8). It
resumed in the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia, 520 B.C.,
about 15 years later.
5:1–17 The Work Is Resumed, and Local Officials Seek Confirm­ ation of
Cyrus’ s Decree. After a period of inactivity, the leaders resume work on
rebuilding the temple, and provincial officials inquire into its legitimacy.
FACT
The Behistun Inscription. This 50-by-80-foot (15-by-24 m) inscription was
carved into the face of a cliff in western Iran. Using various languages, it
provides an autobiography of Darius’s life, lineage, and victories as king of
Persia.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:1–2 The prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, are also known
from their books. These two books contain prophecies made in the second year
of King Darius, 520 B.C. (Hag. 1:1; 2:1; Zech. 1:1, 7; see note on Ezra 4:24; see
also 6:14). Haggai says the people had lost sight of their priority of rebuilding
the temple (Hag. 1:4–6). Ezra 5:1–2 connects the work of the prophets and the
renewed activity. Zerubbabel and Jeshua are simply reconfirming Cyrus’s
decree, recognizing it as God’s will.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:3–5 The officials Tattenai and Shethar-bozenai are much
more neutral than the officials in 4:8–10. Clearly they have no knowledge of
Cyrus’s decree, probably because the work had long been stopped. They are
interested only in the proper authorization of this work. They do not interfere
with its progress. The eye of their God was watching over the builders’
activity and protecting them.
ZERUBBABEL
King Cyrus of Persia decreed that the Jewish exiles in Babylon should return
to Jerusalem and rebuild the destroyed temple. Zerubbabel, whom the
prophet Haggai refers to as “governor of Judah” (Hag. 1:1), was one of the
first exiles to return. Along with the priest Jeshua, he rebuilt the altar of the
Lord so that sacrifices could once again be made. The following year, under
the guidance and supervision of Zerubbabel and Jeshua, work began on the
temple itself. The foundations of the temple were laid, but opposition from
local governors prevented its completion for more than 20 years. With the
support of the prophets Haggai and Zechariah, Zerubbabel and Jeshua
resumed and completed the reconstruction of the temple during the reign of
King Darius. (Ezra 5:2)
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:6–17 Verse 6 introduces the copy of the letter sent by
Tattenai and Shethar-bozenai to Darius, and vv. 8–17 recite the letter itself.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:8 The province of Judah lay within the Persian province
Beyond the River (see also note on 2:69). Tattenai (5:6) served as governor of
the province, in Samaria. The house of the great God is a diplomatic way of
referring to the temple and the God of Israel. It does not imply the letter writers
believe in him.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:11 The letter writers probably got their information from the
returned exiles themselves, since it reflects their understanding of the situation.
Instead of giving their actual names when asked, the returned exiles say, We
are the servants of the God of heaven and earth. That is, they are serving the
one true God of the whole world. The great king of Israel is Solomon.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:12 This verse sums up the message of 1–2 Kings.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:13–15 These verses repeat information given in 1:2–4. The
text stops short of claiming that Cyrus had also commanded that the rebuilding
be funded by donations from places in Babylon where the exiles lived (see note
on 1:3–4). This was perhaps more than Tattenai or even the exiles cared to
suggest at this point.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:13 Cyrus the king made a decree. See 1:1–4.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:14 Sheshbazzar was one of the early leaders of the returning
exiles (see 1:8). Here he is called governor, a name applied to Tattenai himself
in 5:3. The term could be used loosely, since Judah would not have had a
“governor” on a par with the governor of the entire province Beyond the River
(v. 6, etc.). Darius’s reply also refers to a “governor of the Jews” (6:7), a name
given to Zerubbabel in Hag. 1:1.
EZRA—NOTE ON 5:16–17 it has been in building. The period when building
had stopped was irrelevant both to the information Tattenai was giving and the
request he was making. Tattenai, following the Jews’ own account, wants to
link the original authorization and the present building activity. So he portrays
Sheshbazzar as having laid the temple’s foundations, since it was under his
authority, though that achievement is attributed to Zerubbabel and Jeshua in
3:8–10.
6:1–22 King Darius Discovers and Reaffirms Cyrus’ s Decree, and the Work Is
Completed. A record of Cyrus’s decree is discovered, and King Darius
confirms that the Jews are to be allowed to continue the work.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:1–2 King Darius’s search for Cyrus’s decree is made first in
Babylonia. This is where Cyrus had declared himself king in 539 B.C. and
where many exiled Jews lived. But the scroll containing it was found in
Ecbatana, a summer residence of Persian kings, where Cyrus may have gone
soon after his triumph over Babylon. The province of Media was formerly the
seat of an empire itself, but Cyrus had made it part of Persia. The document
discovered is a record, apparently a memorandum on the decree rather than the
decree itself, which would probably have been on a clay tablet.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:3–5 This record is not identical with the decree as recorded
in 1:2–4. It gives new specifications about the building, its location, its size,
and its materials. Perhaps a copy of the original decree had been found (see
note on 6:1–2), and instructions may have been added to it. Also, different
copies of Cyrus’s original decree may have been made for different purposes
(the one in 1:2–4 included wording for public proclamation, while this version
in 6:3–5 was for the royal archives). The size of the temple might be specified
in order to limit it, since public funds were being used to pay for it. The
absence of a length dimension is odd, and the greater breadth than Solomon’s
temple is unexpected (compare 1 Kings 6:2), especially in view of Ezra 3:12.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:4 Using three layers of great stones and one layer of
timber follows the construction of the older temple (1 Kings 6:36; 7:12).
While the original decree had required people in Babylon to help pay for the
project (Ezra 1:4), this record requires that the cost be met from the royal
treasury.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:7 Governor of the Jews refers to Zerubbabel (compare Hag.
1:1). What became of the first governor, Sheshbazzar, is not known.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:8–10 Darius confirms Cyrus’s decree and also provides for
costs from taxes raised in the province Beyond the River itself (v. 8). He also
provides materials for sacrifices (v. 9), with the political condition that the Jews
would pray for the life of the king and his sons (v. 10). Darius’s generosity
was part of his plan for maintaining Persian power.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:11–12 Darius makes a further decree, backed up with a
typical threat. He borrows language from the Israelite way of speaking about
God’s presence in Jerusalem (the God who has caused his name to dwell
there, compare Deut. 12:5). This does not necessarily mean that Darius
believes in the one true God (compare note on Ezra 1:3–4).
Zerubbabel’ s Temple
The rebuilding of Jerusalem’ s temple was done in stages (c. 536–516 B.C.). First, the altar was built, so
that sacrifices could again be made (Ezra 3:2–3). The second phase was the laying of the foundation of
the temple. This elicited mixed reactions from the people. Some rejoiced that the foundation was laid,
while others, especially the elder priests, were sad, presumably because the quality of construction was
inferior to that of the previous temple. Due to the opposition of the local population and the lack of
motivation among the Jews, it took 20 years to complete the construction of the temple building.
The only information given in the biblical record about the architecture of the temple is the dimensions,
which were sixty cubits (90 feet /27 m) high and wide (Ezra 6:3). As there is no mention of the length of
the building, these dimensions must refer to the facade of the temple, i.e., the Porch.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:14 God, speaking here through his prophets, is the real
power behind events. But the actions of the Persian kings on behalf of the Jews
are also acknowledged.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:15 The month of Adar (February/March) was the last month
of the year. The sixth year of the reign of Darius was 515 B.C., almost exactly
70 years after the destruction of the first temple (586), fulfilling the prophecy
of 70 years of exile (see note on 1:1).
FACT
How long did it take to rebuild the temple? The Jews returning from exile
faced many obstacles in rebuilding the temple. The non-Jewish people now
living in the land resisted their efforts, and the returned exiles often lacked
the motivation to work. The temple took 20 years to complete, and it fell far
short of the grandeur of Solomon’s temple.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:16–17 the people of Israel. Even though the returned exiles
consisted of only three tribes (see note on 1:5), they represent all 12, the
number of the tribes of Israel. The other divisions, the priests and the
Levites and the laity, are a typical way of describing the whole community in
Ezra. with joy. The Lord had fulfilled his prophecies and answered his
people’s prayers. There is spontaneous joy when God’s people see evidence
that he is working in the world. The dedication of this house follows its
completion.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:18 The priests and Levites are set in their divisions,
grouped according to their temple duties, as King David had done (1
Chronicles 23–27).
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:19–22 The text returns from Aramaic to Hebrew in v. 19 (see
note on 4:7–8). The Passover is kept on its appointed date, followed
immediately by the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which lasts for seven days
(see Lev. 23:5–6). Participating are the people of Israel and the people of the
land who had joined them (see note on Ezra 6:21). Persia’s king now ruled
over the territorial empire of the Assyrians, so he could be called king of
Assyria.
EZRA—NOTE ON 6:21 Remarkably, the returning Jews are joined by every one
who had . . . separated himself from the uncleanness of the peoples of the
land to worship the LORD. The community was based on faith rather than on
ancestry. Non-Israelites who expressed faith in God and a willingness to follow
his law were welcome.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:1–8:36 Ezra the Priest Comes to Jerusalem to Establish the
Law of Moses. The text now skips ahead 57 years (see note on 7:1–7). Ezra the
scribe is charged by King Artaxerxes to establish the Law of Moses in
Jerusalem. This section tells of Ezra’s commission, his journey, and his
companions.
Kings of Persia Mentioned in Ezra–Nehemiah
Cyrus 539–530 B.C.
Darius I 522–486
Xerxes (Ahasuerus) 485–464
Artaxerxes I 464–423
7:1–28 King Artaxerxes Gives Ezra Authority to Establish the Mosaic Law.
Artaxerxes gives Ezra the authority to establish the Mosaic law in Judah, to
appoint officials to administer the law, and to provide for the further adornment
of the temple.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:1–7 Ezra is introduced first as a priest, in the line of Aaron
the chief priest. He comes to Jerusalem in the seventh year, that is, in 458
B.C., 57 years after the temple dedication.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:6–7 Ezra is a scribe skilled in the Law of Moses. The
people badly need instruction in the law. Ezra has apparently asked the king for
permission and resources to go to Jerusalem (v. 7). Artaxerxes grants Ezra all
that he needs, for the hand of the LORD his God was on him (see note on
1:1). Ezra comes to Judah with a new wave of immigrants.
EZRA
Ezra is described as “a man learned in matters of the commandments of the
Lord and his statutes for Israel” (7:11). Both a priest and scribe, Ezra was
commissioned by King Artaxerxes of Persia to establish the Law of Moses in
Jerusalem. The king also gave him money from the royal treasury to beautify
the temple. Arriving in Jerusalem 57 years after the temple was rebuilt, Ezra
appointed judges to administer the law. Seventy years of Babylonian exile
had had a negative effect on the people’s relationship with the Lord. The
Lord enabled Ezra to guide Israel as they sought once again to live according
to the law. (Ezra 7:1–6)
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:9 the first month . . . the fifth month. The journey of 900
miles (1,448 km) from Babylon to Jerusalem took nearly four months. This
was a slow pace, probably because the caravan included children and elderly
people.
FACT
How long was the journey from Babylon to Jerusalem? It took Ezra and the
caravan he was traveling with four months to traverse the nearly 900 miles
(1,448 km) from Babylon to Jerusalem. An army could have traveled much
faster, but Ezra’s entourage probably included children and elderly people.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:10 Ezra’s mission was to teach God’s statutes and rules.
These appear throughout Exodus to Deuteronomy, especially in Exodus 20–23,
Leviticus, and Deuteronomy 12–26.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:11 Artaxerxes’ decree is in a letter in Aramaic (see note on
4:7–8) addressed to Ezra.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:12 The title king of kings was used by Persia’s kings. It
expresses their sovereignty over many conquered peoples. Ezra is called the
scribe of the Law of the God of heaven. This may refer to a responsibility he
had in Babylon, even before returning to Jerusalem.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:13–14 The decree from Artaxerxes echoes Cyrus’s decree in
authorizing any Jews who wish to go to Jerusalem (compare 1:3). The charge
to make inquiries about Judah and Jerusalem according to the Law of
your God no doubt reflects Ezra’s own priority, and perhaps his belief that the
law is not being properly kept there.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:15–18 Ezra is permitted to gather further resources in the
whole province of Babylonia. He is permitted to decide how best to use the
resources.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:19–20 vessels . . . for the service of the house of your God.
Artaxerxes adds these to the temple treasures previously returned by Cyrus,
apparently as his own gift. He also allows Ezra whatever he needs from the
public funds in the king’s treasury.
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:22 The talent was 75 pounds (34 kg). The amount of silver
has been estimated at a quarter to a third of all the annual taxes paid in the
province Beyond the River. The wheat, wine, and oil would have been used for
cereal offerings, for drink offerings, and for the lamp in the temple (Ex. 27:20;
29:2). The quantities would have supplied the temple’s needs for two years.
Salt, supplied without limit, was for preservation and seasoning (Ex. 30:35;
Lev. 2:13).
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:23 In making these provisions (v. 22), the king may have
been hoping to keep away God’s wrath against himself (the king) and his
sons (see also 6:10).
EZRA—NOTE ON 7:27 who put such a thing as this into the heart of the king.
See note on 1:1. to beautify the house of the LORD. The author uses the same
terms as Isa. 60:7 (see note on Isa. 60:5–7); he sees this event as fulfilling
Isaiah’s prophecy.
8:1–36 Ezra Journeys to Jerusalem with a New Wave of Returnees, Bearing
Royal Gifts for the Temple. This section gives a more extended account of
Ezra’s return to Jerusalem. Readers learn of those who returned with Ezra (vv.
1–14), how he recruited additional priests (vv. 15–20), their prayer for the
journey (vv. 21–23), and Ezra’s provision for the temple (vv. 24–36).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:1–14 The party returning with Ezra was a considerable
addition to Judah, numbered here according to the heads of their fathers’
houses, that is, heads of families (v. 1). There are two priestly divisions,
namely, Phinehas and Ithamar. These were the remaining sons of Aaron
following the judgment on Nadab and Abihu (Lev. 10:1–7). Ezra was of the
line of Phinehas (Ezra 7:5). Daniel (8:2) is otherwise unknown; he is not the
Daniel carried off to Babylon in 605 B.C. A third division is a line of David
(8:2; for Hattush, see 1 Chron. 3:22). Ezra’s party aims to replenish the
priesthood, and perhaps also to renew the claims of the Davidic house to rule in
Judah.
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:15 The party camps outside Babylon at the river that runs
to Ahava, no doubt one of the canals extending from the Euphrates. Ezra
discovers that, though he had priests with him, there were none of the sons of
Levi, that is, the Levites (see 2:40).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:17–19 Nothing is known of Iddo or of Casiphia. But
apparently there were Levites and temple servants (see 2:43–54; 1 Chron. 9:2)
in Casiphia, perhaps training for when there would be a temple again in
Jerusalem. Mahli and Merari belong to the same Levitical family (Num.
3:33).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:21 a fast. Fasting had become important in the exile as a
way of expressing repentance (see Neh. 9:1; Est. 4:3).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:22–23 On the power of his wrath, see 6:10; 7:23. Contrast
Ezra’s policy in 8:22 with Nehemiah’s (Neh. 2:9). and he listened to our
entreaty. God’s control of historical events is the background for this entire
book (see Ezra 8:31; also note on 1:1).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:26 The amounts of silver and gold are extraordinarily large,
the silver weighing around 25 tons (22 metric tons) and the gold 3.75 tons (3.4
metric tons).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:28–30 The priests themselves are holy to the LORD (Ex.
29:1). They are set aside for his service, as are the precious metals and vessels
donated (see Ex. 30:26–29).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:31 The group sets out on the twelfth day of the first month
(Nisan, March/April). The plan to leave on the first day (7:9) had been delayed
by the need to send for more Levites. he delivered us from the hand of the
enemy. Whether there were actual attacks on the group is not said, but God’s
protection on the journey from Babylon recalls the exodus of Israel from
Egypt.
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:32–34 We came to Jerusalem. This was on the first day of
the fifth month (Ab, July/August), after nearly four months of travel (see note
on 7:9).
EZRA—NOTE ON 8:35 For the first time, these exiles see and worship at the
rebuilt temple.
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:1–10:44 Ezra Discovers and Confronts the Problem of
Intermarriage. Ezra discovers that the Jewish community has mixed with
idolatrous non-Jewish groups in religion and in marriage. He leads the
community in repentance and in a systematic separation from the foreign
women and their children.
9:1–15 Ezra Discovers the Problem of Marriage to Idolaters, and Prays. Ezra
hears that many Israelites have married people of other religions. He prays
about the situation (vv. 6–15).
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:1–2 For the peoples of the lands, see note on 3:3. the
Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, . . . and the Amorites.
These were among the seven idolatrous nations Israel was commanded to drive
out of the land (see Deut. 7:1–5). The Ammonites and Moabites lived east of
the Jordan, outside of the Promised Land, and were especially hostile to Israel
(Deut. 23:3–4). Some Israelites had taken wives from foreign nations who
worshiped other gods. Such people could join the people of Israel, however, if
they were willing to follow the Lord God alone (see note on Ezra 6:21). Their
abominations (9:1) refers to their worship of other gods and the wicked
practices that went with such worship (Deut. 12:31). The issue was not ethnic
purity (see Ezra 6:21); intermarriage could lead to spiritual unfaithfulness, and
so it was forbidden (Deut. 7:3). The holy race is literally “holy seed/offspring”
and refers to the “offspring” of Abraham (Gen. 12:1–3; 15:5; 17:7–8). Isaiah
uses the term “holy seed” to describe the surviving remnant of Israel that
would be brought to life again after the terrible judgment of the exile (Isa.
6:13).
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:3 Ezra mourns that the “holy race” has compromised its
newly won salvation by returning to the sins that had brought judgment in the
first place.
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:4 Trembled at the words of the God of Israel describes
eagerness to obey God and respect for his holiness (see Isa. 66:2).
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:6–7 Ezra confesses for the community, beginning with the
historic sins of Israel that had led to the Babylonian exile. our iniquities . . .
our guilt. These two strong terms are each repeated twice. Ezra knows that his
people had deserved to be exiled because of their sins.
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:7 the days of our fathers. The time before the exile (see
Zech. 1:4). The terms sword, captivity, plundering, and shame sum up the
disasters experienced for failing to keep the covenant. They also bring to mind
the consequences for disobedience noted in Lev. 26:14–39 and Deut. 28:15–68
(see 2 Kings 17:20; Jer. 24:9–10).
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:8 For a brief moment, that is, for the time following
Cyrus’s edict, Israel has enjoyed God’s favor. It has actually been nearly a
century, but that is “brief” compared to Israel’s long history. Ezra refers to the
returned exiles as the remnant, as does Nehemiah (Neh. 1:2; see also Isa.
10:20–22; Jer. 24:8). His holy place refers to the temple and, more broadly, to
the land of Judah.
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:9 we are slaves. The exiles remain under the authority of
Persia (see Neh. 9:36–37). Even so, God has shown the steadfast love that
characterizes his covenant with Israel. He expects the same from Israel in
return (compare Hos. 6:6). Judea. See note on Ezra 2:69.
EZRA—NOTE ON 9:10–12 Ezra alludes to Deut. 7:1–5 and the community’s
unlawful intermarriage. impure . . . impurity . . . uncleanness. The indigenous
people’s way of life and worship is totally incompatible with the life and
worship required by the holy God of Israel.
10:1–17 The People Agree to Dissolve the Marriages. Ezra prays, and the
people confess their sin (vv. 1–2). They agree to do God’s will (vv. 3–5). Ezra
seeks a solution (vv. 6–8), which is for them to separate from their wives (vv.
9–12), and the people obey (vv. 13–17).
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:1 While Ezra prayed. Ezra has been giving a first-person
account since 7:27; now, a different narrator takes over. a very great
assembly. Ezra’s public prayer and grief bring many people to repentance—
they wept bitterly.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:2 Shecaniah speaks for the whole gathering. Jehiel. See
also v. 26; Shecaniah’s own father may have had a mixed marriage. The word
translated married means literally “we have given a home,” perhaps implying
these were not actual marriages.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:3 Shecaniah’s belief that “there is hope for Israel” (v. 2)
depends on their making a covenant with God. In this case it means a binding
promise to put away the foreign wives and their children. This is not the
usual expression for “divorce” and may also imply that these were not proper
marriages. It simply means “bring out,” in effect removing them from the
community. Thus, the situation is not the same as 1 Cor. 7:12–14, where Paul
tells Christians not to divorce their unbelieving spouses. This account in Ezra
describes an unusual situation and does not call for divorcing unbelieving
spouses today. the counsel of my lord (that is, Ezra). Ezra may have already
outlined a plan for taking care of the foreign wives and their children, even
though it is not recorded here (but see note on Ezra 10:18–44). according to
the Law. That is, Deut. 7:1–5. those who tremble. See note on Ezra 9:4.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:7–8 assemble at Jerusalem. This was a special gathering.
Survival of the community was at stake. banned from the congregation.
Anyone who refused to participate in the plan to renounce the foreign wives
and children would also be removed from the community.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:9 The ninth month, Chislev, is roughly December, the time
of the so-called early rains. The people are trembling partly for fear of God (as
in 9:4) and partly because they are cold and wet in the heavy rain.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:10 increased the guilt of Israel. The return from exile had
signified that Israel’s past sins had been forgiven (Isa. 40:1–2). Ezra now points
to renewed sin, and possibly the renewed wrath of God.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:11 Make confession could also be translated in other
contexts as “give thanks or praise” (compare Josh. 7:19 and esv footnote).
Rightful confession is itself a kind of worship.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:14 wrath of our God. See note on v. 10.
EZRA—NOTE ON 10:16–17 examine the matter. Thorough inquiry was a part of
judges’ duties (see Deut. 17:4). The whole inquiry took three months.
FACT
An unscheduled assembly in Jerusalem. Three times each year, all the people
of Israel were to gather in Jerusalem: Passover, Pentecost, and the Feast of
Tabernacles. The unscheduled meeting in 10:9 took place in early winter,
when it would have been cold and rainy in Jerusalem.
10:18–44 List of Those Who Were Implicated. The list of around a hundred
names may suggest a more limited problem than one might have expected. In
that case, the severe reaction of Ezra and the community recognizes the danger
they all could face because of the actions of a few (see Deut. 17:7). The
extensive inquiry must have considered each case separately (see Ezra 10:16–
17). In some cases, a foreign wife and her children may have adopted Israel’s
religion, as permitted in 6:21. Those who were turned away probably returned
to their non-Jewish families.
N e h e m i a h
(return to table of contents)
Nehemiah 1 • Nehemiah 2 • Nehemiah 3 • Nehemiah 4 • Nehemiah 5
•
Nehemiah 6 • Nehemiah 7 • Nehemiah 8 • Nehemiah 9 • Nehemiah 10
Nehemiah 11 • Nehemiah 12 • Nehemiah 13
Introduction to Nehemiah
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Purpose and Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Persian Empire at the Time of Nehemiah
Global Message of Nehemiah
The Big Picture of Nehemiah
Nehemiah’s Frailty
God’s Global Purposes in Nehemiah
Lessons for Global Leaders
Anticipating the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Study Notes
•
Introduction to Nehemiah
Introduction to Nehemiah
Timeline
Author and Date
Nehemiah is the central figure in the book. It contains some of his own records,
but he is not the author of the entire book. The same author probably wrote
Nehemiah and portions of Ezra. Nehemiah arrived in Jerusalem in 445 B.C., 13
years after Ezra arrived. He returned for a further visit sometime between 433
and 423 B.C. He may have made several journeys between Persian capitals and
Jerusalem in this period of 20 years (see chart).
Theme
The theme of Nehemiah is the Lord’s protection of his people and their need to
be faithful in worship and in keeping the Mosaic law.
Purpose and Background
The basic purpose and background of Nehemiah are the same as that for Ezra
(see Introduction to Ezra). Ezra, “a scribe skilled in the Law of Moses” (Ezra
7:6), called the returning exiles back to covenant loyalty and obedience to the
law. Nehemiah rebuilt the city walls so that the community could be protected
from enemies who might take advantage of them.
Key Themes
1. The Lord hears prayer (1:4–6).
2. The Lord works providentially, especially through powerful rulers, to
bring about his greater purposes (e.g., 2:8).
3. The Lord protects his people. Because of this, they need not be afraid
(4:14).
4. The Lord is merciful and faithful to his promises despite his people’s
ongoing sin (9:32–35).
5. Worship is at the center of the life of God’s people. It includes the willing,
joyful giving of resources (10:32–39).
6. God’s people need to be on their guard against their own moral weakness
(ch. 13).
Outline
I. Nehemiah Returns to Jerusalem to Rebuild Its Walls (1:1–2:20)
A. Nehemiah learns of Jerusalem’s dilapidation (1:1–11)
B. Nehemiah gains permission to return and inspects Jerusalem’s walls
(2:1–16)
C. First signs of opposition (2:17–20)
II. The Wall Is Built, Despite Difficulties (3:1–7:4)
A. The people work systematically on the walls (3:1–32)
B. Opposition intensifies, but the people continue watchfully (4:1–23)
C. Nehemiah deals with injustices in the community; Nehemiah’s
personal contribution to the project (5:1–19)
D. A conspiracy against Nehemiah, but the wall is finished (6:1–7:4)
III. A Record of Those Who Returned from Exile (7:5–73)
IV . The Reading of the Law, and Covenant Renewal (8:1–10:39)
A. The law is read (8:1–8)
B. The people are to be joyful (8:9–12)
C. The people keep the Feast of Booths (8:13–18)
D. A prayer of confession, penitence, and covenant commitment (9:1–
38)
E. Signatories and specific commitments (10:1–39)
V . The Population of Jerusalem and the Villages; Priests and Levites (11:1–
12:43)
A. Those who lived in Jerusalem and the villages of Judah (11:1–36)
B. High priests and leading Levites since the time of Zerubbabel (12:1–
26)
C. Dedication of the walls (12:27–43)
VI. Nehemiah Deals with Problems in the Community (12:44–13:31)
A. The administration of offerings for the temple (12:44–47)
B. Ejection of Tobiah the Ammonite from the temple (13:1–9)
C. Dealing with neglect of the offerings (13:10–14)
D. Dealing with Sabbath breaking (13:15–22)
E. The problem of intermarriage again (13:23–29)
F. Summary of Nehemiah’s temple reforms (13:30–31)
The Persian Empire at the Time of Nehemiah
c. 450 B.C.
During the time of Nehemiah, the Persian Empire had reached its greatest
extent, engulfing nearly the entire Near East. In 539 B.C. the Persians under
Cyrus the Great defeated the Babylonians and absorbed the lands of Israel and
Judah (which they called “Beyond the River”) into their empire. The next year
Cyrus allowed the people of Judah (now called Jews) to return home and
rebuild the temple of the Lord. Several waves of returning Jews resettled in
Judea. In about 445 B.C., Nehemiah was granted permission to rebuild
Jerusalem’s ruined walls.
The Global Message of Nehemiah
The Big Picture of Nehemiah
The book of Nehemiah records the success and failure of visionary
leadership among the exiles who returned to Jerusalem. Though the city
wall in Jerusalem had been in ruins for almost 150 years (since Babylon
destroyed Jerusalem in 586 B.C.), Nehemiah mobilized the Jews to rebuild
the wall in only 52 days (Neh. 6:15)! He was an ordinary man whose
preparation for ministry came in the Persian palace as the king’s cupbearer
(1:11–2:8). But he became an extraordinary leader through his diligence in
prayer (1:5–11; 2:4; 4:9; 6:9), great faith in God (2:8, 20; 4:14, 20), and
skill in organizing and managing people (chs. 3 and 5). Nehemiah’s
perseverance in the face of opposition led to the defeat of his opponents
(chs. 4 and 6) and the renewal of the temple as a place of worship (ch. 12).
Nehemiah’s Frailty
There is a darker side to Nehemiah’s ambition, however. He is also
portrayed as a leader whose task-oriented nature could lead him to lose
sight of people (see his confession of guilt in Neh. 5:10). This trait became
most evident when Nehemiah returned from a time in Persia to find that his
ministry had failed despite its earlier success (ch. 13). Though his
frustration is understandable, Nehemiah seems to go too far by becoming
rather abusive against those who have broken their promises to God (13:25,
28; compare Ezra 9:3–5; 10:1). His career as a leader thus traces a familiar
and troubling path: Nehemiah begins his ministry by confessing that he is a
sinner like his people (Neh. 1:6) and he overcomes many obstacles through
perseverance and prayer, but he concludes his ministry by confessing the
sins of others with no mention of his own (13:29, 31). In this regard
Nehemiah resembles other Old Testament leaders, such as David, Solomon,
and Josiah, who started well but did not finish well.
In light of this focus on Nehemiah, the book that bears his name may
seem somewhat unrelated to God’s universal purposes. What does a story
about rebuilding a city wall and reestablishing worship in Jerusalem have to
do with God’s universal mission to redeem his creation? Indeed, a book that
describes intense opposition to intermarriage with other races (Nehemiah
13) may seem too sectarian for our pluralistic world (see “The Global
Message of Ezra” for more discussion of intermarriage).
God’s Global Purposes in Nehemiah
However, God’s global purposes can still be seen in Nehemiah—in two
major ways.
Strategic international influence. First, God reigns over the entire world
as the “God of heaven” (Neh. 1:4, 5; 2:20; compare 9:5–6, 32). The book of
Nehemiah begins, not in Jerusalem among God’s people, but with an
account of Nehemiah fulfilling the role of a civil servant in the Persian
royal court. In God’s sovereignty, the vocation of this cupbearer in exile
provides the catalyst for the people of God to receive all that they need to
revive their city (1:1–2:8). Like Joseph, Daniel, and Esther, Nehemiah has
been placed by God in a foreign palace to advocate with rulers and achieve
breakthroughs for God’s people. This repeated pattern in the Old Testament
shows that the exile played two complementary roles in God’s plan for the
nations: God sent the nations to take Israel into exile, but he also used the
exile to move his children into positions of international influence. Thus
God showed himself sovereign over the affairs of both his own people and
the nations.
Blessing the nations. Second and related to this, the identity of God’s
chosen people is closely bound up with his purposes for all peoples. The
communal confession of the Levites (Neh. 9:5–37), for example, begins by
linking God’s reign over creation with his special choice of Abraham and
his descendants: “You are the Lord, you alone. You have made heaven, the
heaven of heavens, with all their host, . . . You are the Lord, the God who
chose Abram and brought him out of Ur of the Chaldeans and gave him the
name Abraham” (9:6–7). God had blessed Israel so that they might bring
divine blessing and righteousness to the nations (9:8–15; see also Gen.
12:1–3; 17:6–8). Yet the later history of Israel reveals a people who rebelled
“presumptuously” (Neh. 9:16, 29) against God, much as Pharaoh
“arrogantly” (9:10) opposed Israel. God’s response to human pride, whether
from foreign nations or his own people, has always been to vindicate his
reputation: “you made a name for yourself, as it is to this day” (9:10). Thus
God’s people were treated as his enemies when they became
indistinguishable from the nations, as when Israel disobeyed God by
mingling with the peoples of the land and adopting their customs (13:4–29).
The fulfillment of God’s global purposes always requires that his people be
distinct from the other nations, so that they can be a blessing to those
nations (Deut. 26:16–19; 1 Pet. 2:11–12).
Lessons for Global Leaders
The universal themes of Nehemiah gain particular relevance for today when
we notice the book’s unique emphasis on the first-person “I,” that is,
Nehemiah’s description of himself as a leader on the international stage of
history. No other historical book of the Old Testament exhibits such a
personal touch. This observation invites further reflections on Nehemiah as
an example of both promise and peril in leading God’s people.
In the world but not of it. Most significantly, our God chooses to place
his servants in surprising yet strategic positions among the nations.
Nehemiah was outwardly a steward of the Persian empire, yet inwardly he
was a servant of God who was passionate for his people (Neh. 1:3–4),
faithful in prayer (1:5–7), and knowledgeable in God’s Word (1:8–11). The
dual identity of Nehemiah illustrates how a marketplace witness plays a
legitimate and necessary role in accomplishing God’s global purposes.
There is a great need today for faithful believers employed in so-called
“secular” vocations who know God’s Word, pray before acting, and take
calculated risks for the sake of God’s kingdom. Like Nehemiah, such
individuals have a unique role to play in changing the course of history.
While supporting and encouraging those like Ezra who are religious
professionals by training, we must also encourage those like Nehemiah
whose primary ministry is in the marketplace.
Opposition. The book of Nehemiah also reminds us that, in a sinful
world, God’s leaders can expect opposition to God’s work. Setbacks do not
indicate that God has somehow lost control. Difficulty in ministry can
frequently be God’s creative means of achieving breakthroughs that could
not happen otherwise. By the same token, however, the conclusion of
Nehemiah’s leadership career shows that the successes and failures of
ministry are not ultimately in human hands. Those who overlook this
principle, as Nehemiah apparently did toward the end of his ministry, run
the risk of forgetting that caring for people matters more than the things
they might accomplish.
Anticipating the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
On a broader note, the unraveling of the Jewish community during
Nehemiah’s trip to Persia (Neh. 13:6–7) points forward to the New
Testament. The ending of the book of Nehemiah demonstrates how Israel’s
various leaders among those who returned to Jerusalem remained unable to
accomplish the lasting deliverance and restoration envisioned by the
prophets (e.g., Isaiah 40–55). Here it is noteworthy that, chronologically
speaking, Nehemiah 13 narrates the latest events in the Old Testament
historical books (about 445 B.C.). By concluding Israel’s story on a bitter
note, this chapter anticipates the need for the New Testament’s message of
inner transformation for the human heart. No matter how sincere they are,
our promises to God cannot be faithfully kept without the saving grace of
Jesus Christ and the sustaining power of the Holy Spirit.
Report from Jerusalem