GENESIS 37 [†]Jacob lived in g the land of his father’s sojournings, in the
land of Canaan.
2[†]These are the generations of Jacob.
Joseph, being seventeen years old, was pasturing the flock with his
brothers. He was a boy with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father’s
wives. And Joseph brought h a bad report of them to their father.
3[†]Now
Israel loved Joseph more than any other of his sons, because he was i the
son of his old age. And he made him j a robe of many colors. [1] 4But when
his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, they
hated him and could not speak peacefully to him.
5[†]Now Joseph had a dream, and when he told it to his brothers they
hated him even more. 6He said to them, “Hear this dream that I have
dreamed: 7Behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and behold, k my
sheaf arose and stood upright. And behold, your sheaves gathered around it
and l bowed down to my sheaf.” 8[†]His brothers said to him, “Are you
indeed to reign over us? Or are you indeed to rule over us?” So they hated
him even more for his dreams and for his words.
9[†]Then he dreamed another dream and told it to his brothers and said,
“Behold, I have dreamed another dream. Behold, the sun, the moon, and
eleven stars were bowing down to me.” 10But when he told it to his father
and to his brothers, his father rebuked him and said to him, “What is this
dream that you have dreamed? Shall I and m your mother and your brothers
indeed come n to bow ourselves to the ground before you?” 11And o his
brothers were jealous of him, p but his father kept the saying in mind.
Joseph Sold by His Brothers
12[†]Now his brothers went to pasture their father’s flock near q Shechem.
13And Israel said to Joseph, “Are not your brothers pasturing the flock at
Shechem? Come, I will send you to them.” And he said to him, “Here I
am.” 14So he said to him, “Go now, see if it is well with your brothers and
with the flock, and bring me word.” So he sent him from the Valley of
r Hebron, and he came to Shechem. 15[†]And a man found him wandering
in the fields. And the man asked him, “What are you seeking?” 16“I am
seeking my brothers,” he said. “Tell me, please, where they are pasturing
the flock.” 17And the man said, “They have gone away, for I heard them
say, ‘Let us go to s Dothan.’” So Joseph went after his brothers and found
them at s Dothan.
18[†]They saw him from afar, and before he came near to them t they
conspired against him to kill him. 19They said to one another, “Here comes
this dreamer.
20Come now, u let us kill him and throw him into one of the
pits. [2] Then we will say that a fierce animal has devoured him, and we will
see what will become of his dreams.” 21[†]But when v Reuben heard it, he
rescued him out of their hands, saying, “Let us not take his life.” 22And
Reuben said to them, “Shed no blood; throw him into this pit here in the
wilderness, but do not lay a hand on him”— w that he might rescue him out
of their hand to restore him to his father.
23So when Joseph came to his
brothers, they stripped him of his robe, x the robe of many colors that he
wore. 24And they took him and y threw him into a pit. The pit was empty;
there was no water in it.
25[†]Then they sat down to eat. And looking up they saw a z caravan of
a Ishmaelites coming from Gilead, with their camels bearing b gum, balm,
and myrrh, on their way to carry it down to Egypt. 26[†]Then Judah said to
his brothers, “What profit is it c if we kill our brother and conceal his
blood? 27Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and d let not our hand be
upon him, for he is our brother, our own flesh.” And his brothers listened to
him. 28Then e Midianite traders passed by. And they drew Joseph up and
lifted him out of the pit, and f sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty
shekels [3] of silver. They took Joseph to Egypt.
29[†]When Reuben returned to the pit and saw that Joseph was not in the
pit, he g tore his clothes 30and returned to his brothers and said, “The boy
h is gone, and I, where shall I go?” 31Then they took i Joseph’s robe and
slaughtered a goat and dipped the robe in the blood. 32And they sent the
robe of many colors and brought it to their father and said, “This we have
found; please identify whether it is your son’s robe or not.” 33And he
identified it and said, “It is my son’s robe. j A fierce animal has devoured
him. Joseph is without doubt torn to pieces.” 34[†]Then Jacob tore his
garments and put sackcloth on his loins and mourned for his son many
days. 35[†]All his sons and all his daughters k rose up to comfort him, but he
refused to be comforted and said, “No, l I shall go down to Sheol to my son,
mourning.” Thus his father wept for him. 36Meanwhile m the Midianites had
sold him in Egypt to Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, n the captain of the
guard.
Judah and Tamar