GENESIS 9 [†]And God blessed Noah and his sons and said to them,
q “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth. 2 r The fear of you and the
dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth and upon every bird of
the heavens, upon everything that creeps on the ground and all the fish of
the sea. Into your hand they are delivered. 3
s Every moving thing that lives
shall be food for you. And t as I gave you the green plants, I give you
everything. 4But you shall not eat flesh with its u life, that is, its blood.
5[†]And for your lifeblood I will require a reckoning: v from every beast I
will require it and w from man. From his fellow man I will require a
reckoning for the life of man.
6 x “Whoever sheds the blood of man,
by man shall his blood be shed,
y for God made man in his own image.
7And you, [1] be fruitful and multiply, increase greatly on the earth and
multiply in it.”
8Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him, 9[†]“Behold, z I
establish my covenant with you and your offspring after you, 10and with
every living creature that is with you, the birds, the livestock, and every
beast of the earth with you, as many as came out of the ark; it is for every
beast of the earth. 11 a I establish my covenant with you, that never again
shall all flesh be cut off by the waters of the flood, and never again shall
there be a flood to destroy the earth.” 12[†]And God said, b “This is the sign
of the covenant that I make between me and you and every living creature
that is with you, for all future generations: 13I have set c my bow in the
cloud, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth.
14When I bring clouds over the earth and the bow is seen in the clouds, 15 d I
will remember my covenant that is between me and you and every living
creature of all flesh. And the waters shall never again become a flood to
destroy all flesh. 16When the bow is in the clouds, I will see it and
remember e the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature
of all flesh that is on the earth.” 17God said to Noah, “This is the sign of the
covenant that I have established between me and all flesh that is on the
earth.”
Noah’s Descendants
18The sons of Noah who went forth from the ark were f Shem, Ham, and
Japheth. (Ham was the father of Canaan.) 19These three were the sons of
Noah, and g from these the people of the whole earth were dispersed. [2]
20[†]Noah began to be a man of the soil, and he planted a vineyard. [3]
21[†]He drank of the wine and became drunk and lay uncovered in his tent.
22And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father and told
his two brothers outside. 23Then Shem and Japheth took a garment, laid it
on both their shoulders, and walked backward and covered the nakedness of
their father. Their faces were turned backward, and they did not see their
father’s nakedness. 24[†]When Noah awoke from his wine h and knew what
his youngest son had done to him, 25he said,
i “Cursed be Canaan;
j a servant of servants shall he be to his brothers.”
26He also said,
“Blessed be the LORD, the God of Shem;
and let Canaan be his servant.
27 May God enlarge Japheth, [4]
and let him dwell in the tents of Shem,
and let Canaan be his servant.”
28After the flood Noah lived 350 years. 29All the days of Noah were 950
years, and he died.
Nations Descended from Noah