GENESIS 39 [†]Now Joseph had been brought down to Egypt, and
l Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian,
m had bought him from the n Ishmaelites who had brought him down there.
2[†] o The LORD was with Joseph, and he became a successful man, and he
was in the house of his Egyptian master.
3His master saw that the LORD was
with him and that the LORD p caused all that he did to succeed in his hands.
4So Joseph q found favor in his sight and attended him, and he made him
overseer of his house r and put him in charge of all that he had. 5From the
time that he made him overseer in his house and over all that he had, the
LORD blessed the Egyptian’s house s for Joseph’s sake; the blessing of the
LORD was on all that he had, in house and field. 6[†]So he left all that he had
in Joseph’s charge, and because of him he had no concern about anything
but the food he ate.
Now Joseph was t handsome in form and appearance. 7And after a time
his master’s wife cast her eyes on Joseph and said, “Lie with me.” 8But he
refused and said to his master’s wife, “Behold, because of me my master
has no concern about anything in the house, and u he has put everything that
he has in my charge. 9He is not greater in this house than I am, nor has he
kept back anything from me except you, because you are his wife. How
then can I do this great wickedness and v sin against God?” 10And as she
spoke to Joseph day after day, he w would not listen to her, to lie beside her
or to be with her.
11But one day, when he went into the house to do his work and none of
the men of the house was there in the house, 12
x she caught him by his
garment, saying, “Lie with me.” But he left his garment in her hand and fled
and got out of the house. 13[†]And as soon as she saw that he had left his
garment in her hand and had fled out of the house, 14she called to the men
of her household and said to them, “See, he has brought among us a
Hebrew to laugh at us. He came in to me to lie with me, and I cried out with
a loud voice. 15And as soon as he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried
out, he left his garment beside me and fled and got out of the house.”
16Then she laid up his garment by her until his master came home, 17and
she told him the same story, saying, “The Hebrew servant, whom you have
brought among us, came in to me to laugh at me. 18But as soon as I lifted up
my voice and cried, he left his garment beside me and fled out of the
house.”
19As soon as his master heard the words that his wife spoke to him, “This
is the way your servant treated me,” his anger was kindled. 20[†]And
Joseph’s master took him and y put him into the z prison, the place where
the king’s prisoners were confined, and he was there in prison. 21But a the
LORD was with Joseph and showed him steadfast love b and gave him favor
in the sight of the keeper of the prison. 22And the keeper of the prison c put
Joseph in charge of all the prisoners who were in the prison. Whatever was
done there, he was the one who did it. 23The keeper of the prison paid no
attention to anything that was in Joseph’s charge, because d the LORD was
with him. And whatever he did, the LORD made it succeed.
Joseph Interprets Two Prisoners’ Dreams