GENESIS 18 [†]And the LORD appeared to him by the o oaks [1] of Mamre,
as he sat at the door of his tent in the heat of the day.
2[†]He lifted up his
eyes and looked, and behold, three men were standing in front of him.
p When he saw them, he ran from the tent door to meet them and bowed
himself to the earth 3[†]and said, “O Lord, [2] if I have found favor in your
sight, do not pass by your servant. 4[†]Let a q little water be brought, and
wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree, 5while I bring a morsel
of bread, that r you may refresh yourselves, and after that you may pass on
— s since you have come to your servant.” So they said, “Do as you have
said.” 6And Abraham went quickly into the tent to Sarah and said, “Quick!
Three seahs [3] of fine flour! Knead it, and make cakes.” 7And Abraham ran
to the herd and took a calf, tender and good, and gave it to a young man,
who prepared it quickly.
8Then he took curds and milk and the calf that he
had prepared, and set it before them. And he stood by them under the tree
while they ate.
9They said to him, “Where is Sarah your wife?” And he said, “She is t in
the tent.” 10The LORD said, “I will surely return to you u about this time
next year, and v Sarah your wife shall have a son.” And Sarah was listening
at the tent door behind him. 11[†]Now w Abraham and Sarah were old,
advanced in years. The way of women had ceased to be with Sarah.
12[†] x So Sarah laughed to herself, saying, y “After I am worn out, and z my
lord is old, shall I have pleasure?” 13The LORD said to Abraham, “Why did
Sarah laugh and say, ‘Shall I indeed bear a child, now that I am old?’ 14 a Is
anything too hard [4] for the LORD? b At the appointed time I will return to
you, about this time next year, and Sarah shall have a son.” 15But Sarah
denied it, [5] saying, “I did not laugh,” for she was afraid. He said, “No, but
you did laugh.”
16[†]Then the men set out from there, and they looked down toward
Sodom. And Abraham went with them to set them on their way.
17[†]The
LORD said, c “Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do, 18seeing
that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the
nations of the earth shall be d blessed in him? 19For I have e chosen [6] him,
that he may command his children and his household after him to keep the
way of the LORD by doing righteousness and justice, so that the LORD may
bring to Abraham what he has promised him.” 20Then the LORD said,
“Because f the outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is great and their sin is
very grave, 21[†] g I will go down to see whether they have done
altogether [7] according to the outcry that has come to me. And if not, h I
will know.”
Abraham Intercedes for Sodom
22 i So the men turned from there and went toward Sodom, but Abraham
j still stood before the LORD.
23[†]Then Abraham drew near and said,
k “Will you indeed sweep away the righteous with the wicked? 24Suppose
there are fifty righteous within the city. Will you then sweep away the place
and not spare it for the fifty righteous who are in it? 25Far be it from you to
do such a thing, to put the righteous to death with the wicked, l so that the
righteous fare as the wicked! Far be that from you! m Shall not the Judge of
all the earth do what is just?” 26[†]And the LORD said, n “If I find at Sodom
fifty righteous in the city, I will spare the whole place for their sake.”
27Abraham answered and said, o “Behold, I have undertaken to speak to
the Lord, I who am but dust and ashes. 28Suppose five of the fifty righteous
are lacking. Will you destroy the whole city for lack of five?” And he said,
“I will not destroy it if I find forty-five there.” 29Again he spoke to him and
said, “Suppose forty are found there.” He answered, “For the sake of forty I
will not do it.” 30Then he said, “Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will
speak. Suppose thirty are found there.” He answered, “I will not do it, if I
find thirty there.” 31He said, “Behold, I have undertaken to speak to the
Lord. Suppose twenty are found there.” He answered, “For the sake of
twenty I will not destroy it.” 32Then he said, p “Oh let not the Lord be
angry, and I will speak again but this once. Suppose ten are found there.”
He answered, “For the sake of ten I will not destroy it.” 33And the LORD
went his way, when he had finished speaking to Abraham, and Abraham
returned to his place.
God Rescues Lot