GENESIS 48 [†]After this, Joseph was told, “Behold, your father is ill.” So
he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. 2And it was told to
Jacob, “Your son Joseph has come to you.” Then Israel summoned his
strength and sat up in bed. 3[†]And Jacob said to Joseph, z “God
Almighty [1] appeared to me at a Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me,
4and said to me, ‘Behold, I will make you fruitful and multiply you, and I
will make of you a company of peoples and will give this land to your
offspring after you b for an everlasting possession.’ 5And now your c two
sons, who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in
Egypt, d are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine, as Reuben and
Simeon are. 6And the children that you fathered after them shall be yours.
They shall be called by the name of their brothers in their inheritance. 7As
for me, when I came from Paddan, to my sorrow e Rachel died in the land
of Canaan on the way, when there was still some distance [2] to go to
Ephrath, and I buried her there on the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem).”
8[†]When Israel saw Joseph’s sons, he said, “Who are these?” 9Joseph
said to his father, f “They are my sons, whom God has given me here.” And
he said, “Bring them to me, please, that g I may bless them.” 10Now h the
eyes of Israel were dim with age, so that he could not see. So Joseph
brought them near him, i and he kissed them and embraced them. 11And
Israel said to Joseph, j “I never expected to see your face; and behold, God
has let me see your offspring also.” 12Then Joseph removed them from his
knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth. 13[†]And Joseph
took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel’s left hand, and
Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel’s right hand, and brought them near
him. 14
k And Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it on the head of
Ephraim, who was the younger, and his left hand on the head of Manasseh,
l crossing his hands (for Manasseh was the firstborn). 15And he blessed
Joseph and said,
“The God m before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked,
the God who has been my shepherd all my life long to this day,
16 n the angel who has o redeemed me from all evil, bless the boys;
and in them let p my name be carried on, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac;
and let them q grow into a multitude [3] in the midst of the earth.”
17When Joseph saw that his father r laid his right hand on the head of
Ephraim, it displeased him, and he took his father’s hand to move it from
Ephraim’s head to Manasseh’s head. 18And Joseph said to his father, “Not
this way, my father; since this one is the firstborn, put your right hand on
his head.” 19But his father refused and said, r “I know, my son, I know. He
also shall become a people, and he also shall be great. Nevertheless, s his
younger brother shall be greater than he, and his offspring shall become a
multitude [4] of nations.” 20So he blessed them that day, saying,
“By you Israel will pronounce blessings, saying,
t ‘God make you as Ephraim and as Manasseh.’”
Thus he put Ephraim before Manasseh. 21[†]Then Israel said to Joseph,
“Behold, I am about to die, but u God will be with you and will bring you
again to the land of your fathers. 22Moreover, I have given to v you rather
than to your brothers one mountain slope [5] that I took from the hand of the
Amorites with my sword and with my bow.”
Jacob Blesses His Sons