GENESIS 19 [†]The q two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot
was sitting in the gate of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he rose to meet them
and bowed himself with his face to the earth 2and said, “My lords, r please
turn aside to your servant’s house and spend the night s and wash your feet.
Then you may rise up early and go on your way.” They said, t “No; we will
spend the night in the town square.” 3But he pressed them strongly; so they
turned aside to him and entered his house. And he made them a feast and
baked unleavened bread, and they ate.
4[†]But before they lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom,
both young and old, all the people to the last man, surrounded the house.
5[†] u And they called to Lot, “Where are the men who came to you tonight?
v Bring them out to us, that we w may know them.” 6[†]Lot went out to the
men at the entrance, shut the door after him, 7and said, “I beg you, my
brothers, do not act so wickedly.
8 x Behold, I have two daughters who have
not known any man. Let me bring them out to you, and do to them as you
please. Only do nothing to these men, for they have come under the shelter
of my roof.” 9[†]But they said, “Stand back!” And they said, “This fellow
y came to sojourn, and z he has become the judge! Now we will deal worse
with you than with them.” Then they pressed hard against the man Lot, and
drew near to break the door down. 10But the men reached out their hands
and brought Lot into the house with them and shut the door.
11And they
struck with a blindness the men who were at the entrance of the house, both
small and great, so that they wore themselves out groping for the door.
12Then the men said to Lot, “Have you anyone else here? Sons-in-law,
sons, daughters, or anyone you have in the city, b bring them out of the
place. 13For we are about to destroy this place, c because the outcry against
its people has become great before the LORD, and the LORD has sent us to
destroy it.” 14So Lot went out and said to his sons-in-law, who were to
marry his daughters, d “Up! Get out of this place, for the LORD is about to
destroy the city.” But he seemed to his sons-in-law to be jesting.
15As morning dawned, the angels urged Lot, saying, “Up! Take your wife
and your two daughters who are here, lest you be swept away in the
punishment of the city.” 16[†]But he lingered. So the men seized him and
his wife and his two daughters by the hand, e the LORD being merciful to
him, and they brought him out and set him outside the city.
17[†]And as they
brought them out, one said, “Escape for your life. f Do not look back or stop
anywhere in the g valley. Escape to the hills, lest you be swept away.”
18And Lot said to them, “Oh, no, my lords. 19Behold, your servant has
found favor in your sight, and you have shown me great kindness in saving
my life. But I cannot escape to the hills, lest the disaster overtake me and I
die. 20Behold, this city is near enough to flee to, and it is a little one. Let me
escape there—is it not a little one?—and my life will be saved!” 21He said
to him, “Behold, I grant you this favor also, that I will not overthrow the
city of which you have spoken. 22Escape there quickly, for I can do nothing
till you arrive there.” Therefore the name of the city was called h Zoar. [1]
God Destroys Sodom
23The sun had risen on the earth when Lot came to Zoar.
24[†]Then i the
LORD rained on Sodom and Gomorrah sulfur and fire from the LORD out of
heaven. 25And he overthrew those cities, and all the valley, and all the
inhabitants of the cities, and what grew on the ground. 26[†]But Lot’s wife,
behind him, looked back, and she became j a pillar of salt.
27[†]And Abraham went early in the morning to the place where he had
k stood before the LORD.
28And he looked down toward Sodom and
Gomorrah and toward all the land of the valley, and he looked and, behold,
the smoke of the land went up like the smoke of a furnace.
29So it was that, when God destroyed the cities of the valley, God
l remembered Abraham and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow when
he overthrew the cities in which Lot had lived.
Lot and His Daughters
30Now Lot went up out of Zoar and m lived in the hills with his two
daughters, for he was afraid to live in Zoar. So he lived in a cave with his
two daughters. 31[†]And the firstborn said to the younger, “Our father is
old, and there is not a man on earth to come in to us after the manner of all
the earth. 32Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with
him, that we may preserve offspring from our father.” 33So they made their
father drink wine that night. And the firstborn went in and lay with her
father. He did not know when she lay down or when she arose.
34The next day, the firstborn said to the younger, “Behold, I lay last night
with my father. Let us make him drink wine tonight also. Then you go in
and lie with him, that we may preserve offspring from our father.” 35So they
made their father drink wine that night also. And the younger arose and lay
with him, and he did not know when she lay down or when she arose.
36Thus both the daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father.
37The
firstborn bore a son and called his name Moab. [2] n He is the father of the
Moabites to this day.
38The younger also bore a son and called his name
Ben-ammi. [3] o He is the father of the Ammonites to this day.
Abraham and Abimelech