GENESIS 26 [†]Now there was a famine in the land, besides u the former
famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Gerar to
v Abimelech king of the w Philistines. 2And the LORD appeared to him and
said, “Do not go down to Egypt; dwell x in the land of which I shall tell
you. 3[†] y Sojourn in this land, and z I will be with you and will bless you,
for a to you and to your offspring I will give all these lands, and I will
establish b the oath that I swore to Abraham your father.
4
c I will multiply
your offspring as the stars of heaven and will give to your offspring all
these lands. And d in your offspring all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed, 5because e Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my charge, my
commandments, my statutes, and my laws.”
Isaac and Abimelech
6[†]So Isaac settled in Gerar.
7When the men of the place asked him about
his wife, f he said, “She is my sister,” for g he feared to say, “My wife,”
thinking, “lest the men of the place should kill me because of Rebekah,”
because h she was attractive in appearance. 8[†]When he had been there a
long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out of a window and
saw Isaac laughing with [1] Rebekah his wife. 9So Abimelech called Isaac
and said, “Behold, she is your wife. How then could you say, ‘She is my
sister’?” Isaac said to him, “Because I thought, ‘Lest I die because of her.’”
10Abimelech said, “What is this you have done to us? One of the people
might easily have lain with your wife, and i you would have brought guilt
upon us.” 11So Abimelech warned all the people, saying, “Whoever touches
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.”
12And Isaac sowed in that land and reaped in the same year a
hundredfold. The LORD j blessed him, 13and the man became rich, and
gained more and more until he became very wealthy.
14He had possessions
of flocks and herds and many servants, so that the Philistines k envied him.
15[†](Now the Philistines had stopped and filled with earth all the wells
l that his father’s servants had dug in the days of Abraham his father.) 16And
Abimelech said to Isaac, “Go away from us, for you are much mightier than
we.”
17[†]So Isaac departed from there and encamped in the Valley of Gerar
and settled there. 18And Isaac dug again the wells of water that had been
dug in the days of Abraham his father, which the Philistines had stopped
after the death of Abraham. And m he gave them the names that his father
had given them. 19[†]But when Isaac’s servants dug in the valley and found
there a well of spring water,
20the herdsmen of Gerar n quarreled with
Isaac’s herdsmen, saying, “The water is ours.” So he called the name of the
well Esek, [2] because they contended with him. 21Then they dug another
well, and they quarreled over that also, so he called its name Sitnah. [3]
22And he moved from there and dug another well, and they did not quarrel
over it. So he called its name Rehoboth, [4] saying, “For now the LORD has
made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.”
23[†]From there he went up to Beersheba. 24And the LORD appeared to
him the same night and said, o “I am the God of Abraham your father.
p Fear not, for q I am with you and will bless you and multiply your
offspring for my servant Abraham’s sake.” 25So he r built an altar there and
called upon the name of the LORD and pitched his tent there. And there
Isaac’s servants dug a well.
26[†]When Abimelech went to him from Gerar with Ahuzzath his adviser
and s Phicol the commander of his army,
27Isaac said to them, “Why have
you come to me, seeing that you hate me and t have sent me away from
you?” 28They said, “We see plainly that the LORD has been with you. So we
said, let there be a sworn pact between us, between you and us, and let us
make a covenant with you, 29that you will do us no harm, just as we have
not touched you and have done to you nothing but good and have sent you
away in peace. u You are now the blessed of the LORD.” 30So he made them
a feast, and they ate and drank. 31In the morning they rose early and
v exchanged oaths. And Isaac sent them on their way, and they departed
from him in peace. 32[†]That same day Isaac’s servants came and told him
about the well that they had dug and said to him, “We have found water.”
33He called it Shibah; [5] therefore the name of the city is w Beersheba to
this day.
34[†]When Esau was forty years old, he took x Judith the daughter of
Beeri the Hittite to be his wife, and Basemath the daughter of Elon the
Hittite, 35and y they made life bitter [6] for Isaac and Rebekah.
Isaac Blesses Jacob