GENESIS 29 [†]Then Jacob went on his journey and came to k the land of
the people of the east. 2As he looked, he saw a well in the field, and behold,
three flocks of sheep lying beside it, for out of that well the flocks were
watered. The stone on the well’s mouth was large, 3and when all the flocks
were gathered there, the shepherds would roll the stone from the mouth of
the well and water the sheep, and put the stone back in its place over the
mouth of the well.
4[†]Jacob said to them, “My brothers, where do you come from?” They
said, l “We are from Haran.” 5He said to them, “Do you know Laban the
son of Nahor?” They said, “We know him.” 6[†]He said to them, “Is it well
with him?” They said, “It is well; and see, Rachel his daughter is coming
with the sheep!” 7He said, “Behold, it is still high day; it is not time for the
livestock to be gathered together. Water the sheep and go, pasture them.”
8But they said, “We cannot until all the flocks are gathered together and the
stone is rolled from the mouth of the well; then we water the sheep.”
9While he was still speaking with them, m Rachel came with her father’s
sheep, for she was a shepherdess. 10[†]Now as soon as Jacob saw Rachel
the daughter of Laban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of Laban his
mother’s brother, Jacob came near and rolled the stone from the well’s
mouth and watered the flock of Laban his mother’s brother.
11[†]Then Jacob
kissed Rachel and wept aloud. 12And Jacob told Rachel that he was n her
father’s kinsman, and that he was Rebekah’s son, o and she ran and told her
father.
13As soon as Laban heard the news about Jacob, his sister’s son, o he ran
to meet him and embraced him and kissed him and brought him to his
house. Jacob told Laban all these things, 14and Laban said to him, p “Surely
you are my bone and my flesh!” And he stayed with him a month.
15Then Laban said to Jacob, “Because you are my kinsman, should you
therefore serve me for nothing? Tell me, what shall your wages be?” 16Now
Laban had two daughters. The name of the older was Leah, and the name of
the younger was Rachel. 17Leah’s eyes were weak, [1] but Rachel was
beautiful in form and appearance. 18[†]Jacob loved Rachel. And he said,
q “I will serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel.” 19Laban
said, “It is better that I give her to you than that I should give her to any
other man; stay with me.” 20So Jacob q served seven years for Rachel, and
they seemed to him but a few days because of the love he had for her.
21Then Jacob said to Laban, “Give me my wife that I may go in to her,
for my time is completed.” 22[†]So Laban gathered together all the people
of the place and r made a feast. 23[†]But in the evening he took his daughter
Leah and brought her to Jacob, and he went in to her.
24(Laban gave [2] s his
female servant Zilpah to his daughter Leah to be her servant.) 25[†]And in
the morning, behold, it was Leah! And Jacob said to Laban, “What is this
you have done to me? Did I not serve with you for Rachel? Why then have
you deceived me?” 26[†]Laban said, “It is not so done in our country, to
give the younger before the firstborn. 27[†] t Complete the week of this one,
and we will give you the other also in return for serving me another seven
years.” 28Jacob did so, and completed her week. Then Laban gave him his
daughter Rachel to be his wife. 29(Laban gave u his female servant Bilhah
to his daughter Rachel to be her servant.) 30So Jacob went in to Rachel also,
and he loved Rachel more than Leah, and served Laban v for another seven
years.
Jacob’s Children
31[†]When the LORD saw that Leah was w hated, x he opened her womb, but
Rachel was barren. 32[†]And Leah conceived and bore a son, and she called
his name Reuben, [3] for she said, “Because the LORD y has looked upon my
affliction; for now my husband will love me.” 33She conceived again and
bore a son, and said, “Because the LORD has heard that I am hated, he has
given me this son also.” And she called his name Simeon. [4] 34Again she
conceived and bore a son, and said, “Now this time my husband will be
z attached to me, because I have borne him three sons.” Therefore his name
was called Levi. [5] 35And she conceived again and bore a son, and said,
“This time I will praise the LORD.” Therefore she called his name
a Judah. [6] Then she ceased bearing.
GENESIS 30 When Rachel saw that b she bore Jacob no children, she
envied her sister. She said to Jacob, “Give me children, or I shall die!”
2Jacob’s anger was kindled against Rachel, and he said, “Am I in the place
of God, c who has withheld from you the fruit of the womb?” 3[†]Then she
said, “Here is my servant d Bilhah; go in to her, so that she may give birth
e on my behalf, [1] that even I may have children [2] through her.” 4So she
gave him her servant Bilhah as a wife, and Jacob went in to her.
5And
Bilhah conceived and bore Jacob a son. 6Then Rachel said, “God has
f judged me, and has also heard my voice and given me a son.” Therefore
she called his name Dan. [3] 7Rachel’s servant Bilhah conceived again and
bore Jacob a second son. 8Then Rachel said, “With mighty wrestlings [4] I
have wrestled with my sister and have prevailed.” So she called his name
g Naphtali. [5]
9When Leah saw that she had ceased bearing children, she took her
servant Zilpah and h gave her to Jacob as a wife. 10Then Leah’s servant
Zilpah bore Jacob a son. 11And Leah said, i “Good fortune has come!” so
she called his name i Gad. [6] 12Leah’s servant Zilpah bore Jacob a second
son. 13And Leah said, “Happy am I! For women j have called me happy.”
So she called his name Asher. [7]
14[†]In the days of wheat harvest Reuben went and found k mandrakes in
the field and brought them to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah,
“Please give me some of your son’s mandrakes.” 15But she said to her, “Is it
a small matter that you have taken away my husband? Would you take away
my son’s mandrakes also?” Rachel said, “Then he may lie with you tonight
in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.” 16When Jacob came from the field
in the evening, Leah went out to meet him and said, “You must come in to
me, for I have hired you with my son’s mandrakes.” So he lay with her that
night. 17[†]And God listened to Leah, and she conceived and bore Jacob a
fifth son. 18Leah said, “God has given me my wages because I gave my
servant to my husband.” So she called his name Issachar. [8]
19And Leah conceived again, and she bore Jacob a sixth son. 20Then
Leah said, “God has endowed me with a good endowment; now my
husband will honor me, because I have borne him six sons.” So she called
his name l Zebulun. [9] 21Afterward she bore a daughter and called her name
Dinah.
22[†]Then God m remembered Rachel, and God listened to her and
n opened her womb. 23She conceived and bore a son and said, “God has
taken away o my reproach.” 24And she called his name Joseph, [10] saying,
p “May the LORD add to me another son!”
Jacob’s Prosperity
25[†]As soon as Rachel had borne Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, “Send me
away, that I may go to my own home and country.
26Give me my wives and
my children q for whom I have served you, that I may go, for you know the
service that I have given you.” 27[†]But Laban said to him, “If I have found
favor in your sight, I have learned by divination that [11] the LORD has
blessed me because of you. 28 r Name your wages, and I will give it.”
29Jacob said to him, s “You yourself know how I have served you, and how
your livestock has fared with me. 30For you had little before I came, t and it
has increased abundantly, and the LORD has blessed you wherever I turned.
But now when shall I u provide for my own household also?” 31[†]He said,
“What shall I give you?” Jacob said, “You shall not give me anything. If
you will do this for me, I will again pasture your flock and keep it: 32let me
pass through all your flock today, removing from it every speckled and
spotted sheep and every black lamb, and the spotted and speckled among
the goats, and v they shall be my wages. 33So my honesty will answer for
me later, when you come to look into my wages with you. Every one that is
not speckled and spotted among the goats and black among the lambs, if
found with me, shall be counted stolen.” 34Laban said, “Good! Let it be as
you have said.” 35[†]But that day Laban removed the male goats that were
striped and spotted, and all the female goats that were speckled and spotted,
every one that had white on it, and every lamb that was black, and put them
in the charge of his sons. 36And he set a distance of three days’ journey
between himself and Jacob, and Jacob pastured the rest of Laban’s flock.
37[†]Then w Jacob took fresh sticks of poplar and almond and plane trees,
and peeled white streaks in them, exposing the white of the sticks. 38He set
the sticks that he had peeled in front of the flocks in the troughs, that is, the
x watering places, where the flocks came to drink. And since they bred
when they came to drink, 39the flocks bred in front of the sticks and so the
flocks brought forth striped, speckled, and spotted. 40And Jacob separated
the lambs and set the faces of the flocks toward the striped and all the black
in the flock of Laban. He put his own droves apart and did not put them
with Laban’s flock. 41[†]Whenever the stronger of the flock were breeding,
Jacob would lay the sticks in the troughs before the eyes of the flock, that
they might breed among the sticks, 42but for the feebler of the flock he
would not lay them there. So the feebler would be Laban’s, and the stronger
Jacob’s. 43[†]Thus the man y increased greatly and z had large flocks,
female servants and male servants, and camels and donkeys.
Jacob Flees from Laban
GENESIS 31 Now Jacob heard that the sons of Laban were saying, “Jacob
has taken all that was our father’s, and from what was our father’s he has
gained all this wealth.” 2And Jacob saw a that Laban did not regard him
with favor as before. 3Then the LORD said to Jacob, b “Return to the land of
your fathers and to your kindred, and I will be with you.”
4[†]So Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah into the field where his
flock was 5and said to them, c “I see that your father does not regard me
with favor as he did before. But the God of my father d has been with me.
6 e You know that I have served your father with all my strength, 7yet your
father has cheated me and changed my wages f ten times. But God did not
permit him to harm me. 8If he said, g ‘The spotted shall be your wages,’
then all the flock bore spotted; and if he said, ‘The striped shall be your
wages,’ then all the flock bore striped. 9Thus God has h taken away the
livestock of your father and given them to me. 10In the breeding season of
the flock I lifted up my eyes and saw in a dream that the goats that mated
with the flock were striped, spotted, and mottled. 11Then the angel of God
said to me in the dream, ‘Jacob,’ and I said, ‘Here I am!’ 12And he said,
‘Lift up your eyes and see, all the goats that mate with the flock are striped,
spotted, and mottled, for i I have seen all that Laban is doing to you. 13I am
the God of Bethel, j where you anointed a pillar and made a vow to me.
Now k arise, go out from this land and return to the land of your kindred.’”
14[†]Then Rachel and Leah answered and said to him, “Is there l any
portion or inheritance left to us in our father’s house? 15Are we not regarded
by him as foreigners? For m he has sold us, and he has indeed devoured our
money.
16All the wealth that God has taken away from our father belongs to
us and to our children. Now then, whatever God has said to you, do.”
17So Jacob arose and set his sons and his wives on camels. 18He drove
away all his livestock, all his property that he had gained, the livestock in
his possession that he had acquired in n Paddan-aram, to go to the land of
Canaan to his father Isaac. 19[†]Laban had gone to shear his sheep, and
Rachel stole her father’s o household gods. 20[†]And Jacob tricked [1] Laban
the Aramean, by not telling him that he intended to flee. 21[†]He fled with
all that he had and arose and crossed the p Euphrates, [2] and q set his face
toward the hill country of Gilead.
22[†]When it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob had fled, 23he
took his kinsmen with him and pursued him for seven days and followed
close after him into the hill country of Gilead. 24But God came to Laban the
Aramean r in a dream by night and said to him, “Be careful not to say
anything to Jacob, s either good or bad.”
25And Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the hill
country, and Laban with his kinsmen pitched tents in the hill country of
Gilead. 26[†]And Laban said to Jacob, “What have you done, that you have
t tricked me and driven away my daughters like captives of the sword?
27Why did you flee secretly t and trick me, and did not tell me, so that I
might have sent you away with mirth and songs, with tambourine and lyre?
28And why did you not permit me u to kiss my sons and my daughters
farewell? Now you have done foolishly.
29It is v in my power to do you
harm. But the w God of your [3] father spoke to me last night, saying, ‘Be
careful not to say anything to Jacob, x either good or bad.’ 30And now you
have gone away because you longed greatly for your father’s house, but
why did you y steal my gods?” 31Jacob answered and said to Laban,
“Because I was afraid, for I thought that you would take your daughters
from me by force. 32 z Anyone with whom you find your gods shall not live.
In the presence of our kinsmen point out what I have that is yours, and take
it.” Now Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them.
33So Laban went into Jacob’s tent and into Leah’s tent and into the tent of
the two female servants, but he did not find them. And he went out of
Leah’s tent and entered Rachel’s. 34Now Rachel had taken the household
gods and put them in the camel’s saddle and sat on them. Laban felt all
about the tent, but did not find them. 35[†]And she said to her father, “Let
not my lord be angry that I cannot a rise before you, for the way of women
is upon me.” So he searched but did not find the household gods.
36Then Jacob became angry and berated Laban. Jacob said to Laban,
“What is my offense? What is my sin, that you have hotly pursued me?
37For you have felt through all my goods; what have you found of all your
household goods? Set it here before my kinsmen and b your kinsmen, that
they may decide between us two. 38These twenty years I have been with
you. Your ewes and your female goats have not miscarried, and I have not
eaten the rams of your flocks. 39What was torn by wild beasts I did not
bring to you. I bore the loss of it myself. c From my hand you required it,
whether stolen by day or stolen by night. 40There I was: by day the heat
consumed me, and the cold by night, and my sleep fled from my eyes.
41These twenty years I have been in your house. d I served you fourteen
years for your two daughters, and six years for your flock, and e you have
changed my wages ten times. 42[†] f If the God of my father, the God of
Abraham and the g Fear of Isaac, had not been on my side, surely now you
would have sent me away empty-handed. h God saw my affliction and the
labor of my hands and i rebuked you last night.”
43[†]Then Laban answered and said to Jacob, “The daughters are my
daughters, the children are my children, the flocks are my flocks, and all
that you see is mine. But what can I do this day for these my daughters or
for their children whom they have borne? 44Come now, j let us make a
covenant, you and I. k And let it be a witness between you and me.” 45[†]So
Jacob l took a stone and set it up as a pillar.
46And Jacob said to his
kinsmen, “Gather stones.” And they took stones and made a heap, and they
ate there by the heap. 47[†]Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha, [4] but Jacob
called it Galeed. [5] 48Laban said, m “This heap is a witness between you and
me today.” Therefore he named it Galeed, 49 n and Mizpah, [6] for he said,
“The LORD watch between you and me, when we are out of one another’s
sight. 50If you oppress my daughters, or if you take wives besides my
daughters, although no one is with us, see, o God is witness between you
and me.”
51Then Laban said to Jacob, “See this heap and the pillar, which I have
set between you and me. 52 p This heap is a witness, and the pillar is a
witness, that I will not pass over this heap to you, and you will not pass
over this heap and this pillar to me, to do harm. 53The God of Abraham and
the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge between us.” So Jacob
swore by the q Fear of his father Isaac, 54and Jacob offered a sacrifice in the
hill country and called r his kinsmen to eat bread. They ate bread and spent
the night in the hill country.
55 [7] Early in the morning Laban arose and kissed s his grandchildren and
his daughters and blessed them. Then Laban departed and returned home.
Jacob Fears Esau