GENESIS 34 [†]Now f Dinah the daughter of Leah, whom she had borne to
Jacob, went out to see the women of the land. 2[†]And when Shechem the
son of g Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her, he seized her and
lay with her and humiliated her.
3And his soul was drawn to Dinah the
daughter of Jacob. He loved the young woman and spoke tenderly to her.
4So Shechem h spoke to his father Hamor, saying, “Get me this girl for my
wife.”
5Now Jacob heard that he had defiled his daughter Dinah. But his sons
were with his livestock in the field, so Jacob held his peace until they came.
6And Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to speak with him.
7The sons of Jacob had come in from the field as soon as they heard of it,
and the men were indignant and i very angry, because he j had done an
outrageous thing in Israel by lying with Jacob’s daughter, k for such a thing
must not be done.
8[†]But Hamor spoke with them, saying, “The soul of my son Shechem
longs for your [1] daughter. Please give her to him to be his wife. 9Make
marriages with us. Give your daughters to us, and take our daughters for
yourselves. 10You shall dwell with us, and l the land shall be open to you.
Dwell and m trade in it, and n get property in it.” 11[†]Shechem also said to
her father and to her brothers, o “Let me find favor in your eyes, and
whatever you say to me I will give. 12Ask me for as great a p bride price [2]
and gift as you will, and I will give whatever you say to me. Only give me
the young woman to be my wife.”
13The sons of Jacob answered Shechem and his father Hamor deceitfully,
because he had defiled their sister Dinah. 14[†]They said to them, “We
cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one who is uncircumcised, for
q that would be a disgrace to us. 15Only on this condition will we agree with
you—that you will become as we are by every male among you being
circumcised. 16Then we will give our daughters to you, and we will take
your daughters to ourselves, and we will dwell with you and become one
people. 17But if you will not listen to us and be circumcised, then we will
take our daughter, and we will be gone.”
18Their words pleased Hamor and Hamor’s son Shechem. 19And the
young man did not delay to do the thing, because he delighted in Jacob’s
daughter. Now r he was the most honored of all his father’s house. 20So
Hamor and his son Shechem s came to the gate of their city and spoke to the
men of their city, saying, 21[†]“These men are at peace with us; let them
dwell in the land and t trade in it, for behold, the land is large enough for
them. Let us take their daughters as wives, and let us give them our
daughters. 22Only on this condition will the men agree to dwell with us to
become one people—when every male among us is circumcised as they are
circumcised. 23Will not their livestock, their property and all their beasts be
ours? Only let us agree with them, and they will dwell with us.” 24And all
who went out of the gate of his city listened to Hamor and his son Shechem,
and every male was circumcised, all who u went out of the gate of his city.
25[†]On the third day, when they were sore, two of the sons of Jacob,
v Simeon and Levi, w Dinah’s brothers, took their swords and came against
the city while it felt secure and killed all the males. 26They killed Hamor
and his son Shechem with the sword and took Dinah out of Shechem’s
house and went away.
27The sons of Jacob came upon the slain and
plundered the city, because they had defiled their sister.
28They took their
flocks and their herds, their donkeys, and whatever was in the city and in
the field. 29All their wealth, all their little ones and their wives, all that was
in the houses, they captured and plundered.
30Then Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, x “You have brought trouble on
me y by making me stink to the inhabitants of the land, z the Canaanites and
the Perizzites. a My numbers are few, and if they gather themselves against
me and attack me, I shall be destroyed, both I and my household.” 31But
they said, “Should he treat our sister like a prostitute?”
God Blesses and Renames Jacob