GENESIS 50 [†]Then Joseph v fell on his father’s face and wept over him
and kissed him. 2And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to
w embalm his father. So the physicians embalmed Israel. 3Forty days were
required for it, for that is how many are required for embalming. And the
Egyptians x wept for him seventy days.
4And when the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph spoke to the
household of Pharaoh, saying, y “If now I have found favor in your eyes,
please speak in the ears of Pharaoh, saying, 5‘My father made me swear,
saying, “I am about to die: in my tomb z that I hewed out for myself in the
land of Canaan, there shall you bury me.” Now therefore, let me please go
up and bury my father. Then I will return.’” 6And Pharaoh answered, “Go
up, and bury your father, as he made you swear.” 7[†]So Joseph went up to
bury his father. With him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of
his household, and all the elders of the land of Egypt, 8as well as all the
household of Joseph, his brothers, and his father’s household. Only their
children, their flocks, and their herds were left a in the land of Goshen.
9And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen. It was a very
great company.
10[†]When they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which
is beyond the Jordan, b they lamented there with a very great and grievous
lamentation, and he c made a mourning for his father seven days. 11When
the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning on the
threshing floor of Atad, they said, “This is a grievous mourning by the
Egyptians.” Therefore the place was named Abel-mizraim; [1] it is beyond
the Jordan. 12[†]Thus his sons did for him as he had commanded them, 13for
d his sons carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave of
the field at Machpelah, to the east of Mamre, which Abraham e bought with
the field from Ephron the Hittite to possess as a burying place. 14After he
had buried his father, Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all
who had gone up with him to bury his father.
God’s Good Purposes
15[†]When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, “It
may be that Joseph will hate us and pay us back for all the evil that we did
to him.” 16So they sent a message to Joseph, saying, “Your father gave this
command before he died: 17‘Say to Joseph, “Please forgive the
transgression of your brothers and their sin, because they did evil to you.”’
And now, please forgive the transgression of the servants of f the God of
your father.” Joseph wept when they spoke to him. 18[†]His brothers also
came and g fell down before him and said, “Behold, we are your servants.”
19But Joseph said to them, “Do not fear, for h am I in the place of God?
20As for you, you meant evil against me, but i God meant it for good, to
bring it about that many people [2] should be kept alive, as they are today.
21So do not fear; j I will provide for you and your little ones.” Thus he
comforted them and spoke kindly to them.
The Death of Joseph
22[†]So Joseph remained in Egypt, he and his father’s house. Joseph lived
110 years. 23And Joseph saw Ephraim’s children k of the third generation.
The l children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were m counted as
Joseph’s own. [3] 24[†]And Joseph said to his brothers, “I am about to die,
but n God will visit you and bring you up out of this land to the land o that
he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.” 25Then p Joseph made the
sons of Israel swear, saying, “God will surely visit you, and you shall carry
up my bones from here.” 26So Joseph died, being 110 years old. They
q embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
Study Notes for Genesis
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:1–11:26 Primeval History. Genesis 1–11 surveys the
history of the world before Abraham, while chs. 12–50 focus on one main
family. There are no real parallels to chs. 12–50 in the literature of other
ancient civilizations. However, other ancient stories do exist about both
creation and the flood. These stories stand in sharp contrast to the biblical
account. Generally they depict creation as a great struggle, often involving
conflict between the gods. For example, they claim that the flood was sent
because the gods could not stand the noise made by human beings but were
unable to control it in any other way. Genesis disproves such stories by its
teachings. There is only one God, whose word is almighty. He spoke the
world into being. The sun and moon are not gods in their own right but are
created by the one God. It is human sin that prompts the flood. These
principles in Genesis 1–11 run through the rest of Scripture.
FACT
In the Hebrew Bible, the title of Genesis is In the Beginning, the book’s first
words. The English title is related to the Greek word genesis, which means
“beginning.”
1:1–2:3 God’ s Creation and Ordering of Heaven and Earth. The book of
Genesis opens with a majestic description of how God created the heavens and
earth and then put everything in order so that it might become his dwelling
place. God assigns humanity to govern the other creatures on his behalf, so that
the whole earth should become the temple of God, the place of his presence,
displaying his glory.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:1 In the beginning. The opening verse of the Genesis
creation account can be taken as either (1) a summary of the entire process of
creation or (2) a description of the first event in creation. This event would
have occurred sometime before the first day (vv. 3–5), and would have
included the creation of matter, space, and time. This second view emphasizes
the fact that God created the universe from nothing (compare Heb. 11:3). God
created. The Hebrew word for God, ’Elohim, is plural, possibly to express
God’s majesty, but the verb “created” is singular, indicating that God is one
being. In contrast to other ancient Near Eastern accounts of creation, Genesis
always emphasizes that there is only one God. Whenever the Hebrew verb for
“create” occurs in the OT, God is the subject. Heavens and the earth here
means “everything.” Thus, “in the beginning” refers to the beginning of
everything. The text indicates that God created everything in the universe,
which means that he created it out of nothing.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:2 Before the first actual day of creation (vv. 3–5), the
earth was without form and void (compare Jer. 4:23), implying that it lacked
order and content. The reference to darkness . . . over the face of the deep
points to the absence of light. The Spirit of God was hovering suggests that
something was about to happen. There is no reason to think that a long time
elapsed between Gen. 1:1 and 1:2.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:3–5 And God said. God’s absolute power is seen in that
he merely speaks and things are created. Each new section of ch. 1 is
introduced by God’s speaking. Everything that God speaks into being is good
(vv. 10, 12, 18, 21, 25, 31). These verses show how God has arranged time in a
weekly cycle (Day . . . Night). God is pictured as working for six days and
resting on the seventh, which is a model for human activity. Day 4 will develop
this idea further: the lights are placed in the heavens for signs and seasons, for
marking days and years and the times of the festivals, such as Passover. This
sense of time having a structure is further emphasized as each stage of God’s
creative work is separated into specific days. there was evening and there
was morning, the first day. After each workday there is an evening and then a
morning, implying that there is a nighttime (the worker’s daily time of rest) in
between. Similar phrases divide ch. 1 into six distinctive workdays, with 2:1–3
being a seventh day, God’s Sabbath. On the first three days God creates the
environment that the creatures of days 4–6 will inhabit. For example, the sea
and sky (day 2) are occupied by the fish and birds (day 5). These days can be
understood as days in the life of God, but how his days relate to human days is
more difficult to determine (see 2 Pet. 3:8).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:6–8 As light was separated from darkness, so the waters
are separated to form an expanse, which God calls Heaven. It is difficult to
find a single English word that accurately translates the precise meaning of this
Hebrew term (see esv footnote). In this context, it refers to what humans see
above them, that is, the region that contains both heavenly lights (vv. 14–17)
and birds (v. 20).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:9–13 God organizes two further regions: the dry land,
forming Earth; and the waters, forming Seas (vv. 9–10). God then instructs
the earth to bring forth vegetation (vv. 11–12). The creation of distinctive
locations in days 1–3, along with vegetation, prepares for the filling of these
locations in days 4–6.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:14–19 These verses, describing the fourth day, correspond
with the separating of light and darkness on the first day (vv. 3–5). Here is the
creation of lights that will govern time, as well as provide light upon the
earth (v. 15). By referring to them as the greater light and lesser light (v. 16),
the author of Genesis avoids using terms that were also proper names for pagan
gods linked to the sun and the moon. The term made may simply mean that
God “fashioned” or “worked on” these greater and lesser lights. It does not
necessarily mean that they did not exist in any form before this. On this day
God made it possible that the sun and moon would define the passing of time.
The references to seasons (v. 14) or “appointed times” (esv footnote) and to
days and years probably refer to appointed times for religious observances in
the Hebrew calendar (see Ex. 13:10).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:16 and the stars. The immense universe that God created
(see note on Isa. 40:25–26) is mentioned here only briefly, almost as an
afterthought. The focus of Genesis 1 is on the earth.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:20–23 This section, on day 5, describes how the waters
and the expanse of the heavens are filled with various kinds of creatures.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:21 The Hebrew term for great sea creatures can mean
large serpents, dragons, or crocodiles, as well as whales or sharks. Some have
suggested that this could also refer to extinct creatures such as dinosaurs.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:24–25 livestock and creeping things and beasts of the
earth. These terms group the land-dwelling animals into three broad
categories, probably reflecting the way nomadic shepherds would experience
them. This list is not intended to be exhaustive, and it is hard to know in which
category to put some animals.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:26 Let us make man in our image. Some have suggested
that God may be addressing the members of his heavenly court, whom the OT
elsewhere calls “sons of God” (e.g., Job 1:6) and the NT calls “angels.” But
man is not made in the image of angels (see Gen. 1:27), and the Bible never
teaches that angels participated in the creation of human beings. Since God
alone creates man (v. 27), many Christians believe that “let us” means God is
speaking to himself. If so, this would be the first biblical mention of the
“Trinity” (see note on John 1:1).
FACT
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. God said, “Let us make man” (1:26). This
phrase could be the Bible’s earliest indication that God exists as three
persons in one: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Christians around the world
refer to this as the doctrine of the Trinity.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:27 The term image of God can be seen as describing the
ways in which man is different from all other created beings. It describes how
humans resemble God in their ability to think, to communicate, to understand
right and wrong, to be creative, and to experience relationships with God and
with one another. This allows men and women to represent God as they
exercise authority over the rest of creation (see v. 26; and note on v. 28). The
Hebrew word for man (’adam), is often a generic term for both male and
female, though sometimes it refers to man in distinction from woman (e.g.,
2:22, 23; 3:8). It can also be the proper name “Adam” (2:20; 3:17; 4:1; 5:1).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:28–30 Although the word “covenant” does not occur in
the Bible until 6:18, many consider 1:28–30 along with 2:16–17 to be God’s
covenant with Adam. See Hos. 6:7 and note. Adam receives this covenant on
behalf of the rest of mankind. Thus, in the NT, Paul views Adam as a
representative head of the human race (1 Cor. 15:22).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:28 Be fruitful and multiply. From the time of creation,
God’s plan has been that the whole earth should be populated by those who
know him and who serve wisely as his representatives. To subdue the earth
and to have dominion over it probably means that humans are permitted to
make the earth beneficial for themselves. They are to investigate and develop
its resources. This command provides a basis for wise scientific and
technological development. It does not mean that humans may exploit the earth
and its creatures simply to satisfy their own greed.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 1:31 One final occurrence of behold, it was very good
invites the reader to imagine seeing creation through God’s eyes. Despite the
invasion of sin (ch. 3), the material creation retains its basic goodness (see 1
Tim. 4:4).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:1–3 God has now completed the process of putting his
creation in order (see note on 1:1–2:3). That God rested does not imply he was
weary from labor. Rather, God’s resting hints at the purpose of creation. God’s
purpose for the earth is that it should become his dwelling place, not simply a
place for his creatures. God blessed the seventh day and made it holy (2:3).
These words provide the basis for God’s instructing the Israelites to rest from
their normal labor on the Sabbath day (see Ex. 20:8–11).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:4–4:26 Earth’ s First People. Centered initially on the
garden of Eden, the episodes in this part of Genesis recount how God’s ordered
creation is thrown into chaos by the human couple’s disobedience. The
subsequent story of Cain and Abel and then Lamech (ch. 4) shows human
society spiraling downward into violence. These events are essential for
understanding not only the rest of Genesis but the rest of the Bible as well.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:4 These are the generations of. This is the first of 11
such headings in Genesis (5:1; 6:9; 10:1; 11:10; 11:27; 25:12; 25:19; 36:1;
36:9; 37:2). LORD God. Throughout 1:1–2:3 the generic word “God” was used
for the Creator. The reader is now introduced to God’s personal name,
“Yahweh,” which is rendered in most English Bible translations as “LORD,”
using small capital letters. This practice comes from the ancient Jewish
tradition of substituting for “Yahweh” the Hebrew term for “Lord” when
reading the biblical text. The Septuagint (an ancient Greek translation of the
OT) used the Greek word for “Lord” (Kyrios) to refer to God. That translation
was then quoted many times by the NT authors, who also used Kyrios rather
than Yahweh for God’s name. See notes on Ex. 3:14; 3:15.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:7 then the LORD God formed the man of dust from the
ground. The verb “formed” describes a potter fashioning clay into a particular
shape. The close relationship between the man and the ground is reflected in
the Hebrew words ’adam for man and ’adamah for the ground. living
creature. The same Hebrew term is used in 1:20, 24 for sea and land creatures.
(See Paul’s quotation of this passage in 1 Cor. 15:45.)
The Garden of Eden
Genesis describes the location of Eden in relation to the convergence of four rivers. While two of the
rivers are unknown (the Pishon and the Gihon), the nearly universal identification of the other two rivers
as the Tigris and the Euphrates suggests a possible location for Eden at either their northern or southern
extremes.
ADAM
Adam, whose name means “man,” was the first human being. Created out of
dust, he was made in the image of God. Adam was given dominion over the
rest of creation and was placed in the garden of Eden to care for it. God
created Eve as a helper for Adam, and together they enjoyed perfect
fellowship with their Creator. But Adam and Eve chose to disobey God,
which brought sin and death into the world. Because of their sin, all humans
are now born sinners and will someday die. The Bible tells the story of how
God redeems his creation from the curse of Adam’s sin. “For as in Adam all
die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive” (1 Cor. 15:22). (Genesis 2:7)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:8–9 God provides a suitable environment for the man by
planting a garden in Eden, in the east. The name “Eden” suggests luxury and
pleasure. It probably refers to a region much greater than the garden itself. God
formed the man in the “land” (see vv. 5–7), and then put him in the garden
(compare v. 15). The earliest translation into Greek (the Septuagint) used the
word paradeisos, from which comes the English term “paradise” (compare
Luke 23:43), to translate the Hebrew term for “garden.” The abundance of the
garden is suggested by the fact that it contained every tree that is pleasant to
the sight and good for food (Gen. 2:9). This very abundance will later become
a source of temptation (3:6). On the tree of life, see note on 3:22–24. On the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, see note on 2:17.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:10–14 The description of the river that flowed out of
Eden dividing into four rivers implies that Eden occupied a central location in
the ancient world. In spite of the very specific details provided, however,
Eden’s location remains a mystery. While the names Tigris and Euphrates are
associated with the two rivers that surround Mesopotamia, the rivers Pishon
and Gihon, as well as the regions of Havilah and Cush, have not been
satisfactorily identified. The reference to gold and onyx points to the land’s
rich resources.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:15–16 The overall picture of Eden suggests that the park-
like garden is part of a divine sanctuary. The man is put in the garden to work
it and keep it. Since God commanded Adam to work before Adam had
committed any sin, work did not come as a result of sin. Productive work is
part of God’s good purpose for humans. The fact that God commanded the
man implies that God gave the man a leadership role, including the
responsibility to guard and care for all of creation (v. 15). This leadership role
is related to Adam’s relationship with Eve as his wife, who was given as “a
helper fit for him” (v. 18). (On the NT understanding of the relationship
between husband and wife, see Eph. 5:22–33.)
FACT
The Euphrates (2:14) is the longest and most important river in southwest
Asia. Early settlers depended on the river for commerce and agriculture. The
Euphrates and Tigris rivers form what is today the Shatt-al-Arab, a waterway
that flows into the Persian Gulf.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:17 The fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil has been variously understood as giving (1) sexual awareness, (2) moral
discrimination, (3) moral responsibility, and (4) moral experience. Of these
possibilities, the last is the most likely. If Adam disobeys God and eats the fruit
of this tree, he will come to know evil by experience. you shall surely die.
What kind of death does this threaten: physical, spiritual, or some combination
of the two? The Hebrew word can be used for any of these ideas, and the only
way to discover what “surely die” means in this case is to see what happens as
the story unfolds (see note on 3:4–5). In the day that you eat of it does not
mean that death will come on that very day. It means that once the forbidden
fruit is eaten, death will become a certainty.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:18 Not good is a jarring contrast to 1:31. Helper is one
who supplies strength in an area that is lacking in the one who is helped. Fit
for him or “matching him” (see esv footnote) is not the same as “like him.” A
wife is not to be just like her husband but is to complement him. I will make
him can also be translated “I will make for him,” which explains Paul’s
statement in 1 Cor. 11:9.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:20 The man gave names. By naming the animals, the
man demonstrates his authority over all the other creatures. Adam. See note on
5:1–2.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:23–24 This at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my
flesh. Compare 29:14. Marriage creates the closest of all human relationships.
Heterosexual monogamy is the divine pattern for marriage that God established
at creation. Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold
fast to his wife. Marriage creates obligations that are more important than
one’s duty to one’s parents. In ancient Israel, sons did not move away from
home when they married. They lived near their parents and inherited their
father’s land. But they “left” their parents in the sense of putting their wife’s
welfare before that of their parents. The term “hold fast” is used elsewhere for
practicing covenant faithfulness (e.g., Deut. 10:20). Thus, other Bible texts call
marriage a “covenant” (e.g., Prov. 2:17; Mal. 2:14). Paul’s teaching on
marriage in Eph. 5:25–32 is founded on this text. When a man leaves his
parents and takes a wife, they shall become one flesh. That is, they become
one unit, a union of man and woman. This oneness is consummated in sexual
intercourse. Jesus appeals to this verse and to Gen. 1:27 when teaching about
marriage (Matt. 19:4–5).
EVE
God created Eve, whose name means “life,” as a helper for Adam. Fashioned
from one of Adam’s ribs, Eve became the mother (that is, the female
ancestor) of all human beings. Though enjoying perfect fellowship with
God, Eve was deceived by the serpent and disobeyed God by eating from the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Because of their sin, Adam and Eve
were driven from the paradise of Eden and began to experience great
hardship. For Eve, that included pain in childbearing. Yet, as promised in
Genesis 3:15, one of her offspring would defeat the serpent and bring
salvation and eternal life to all who put their trust in him. (Genesis 2:23)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 2:25 naked and . . . not ashamed. The man and woman are
living in a state of innocent delight.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:1–24 The sudden arrival of a speaking serpent presents a
challenge to the human couple. Their choice to disregard God’s instructions is
an act of willful rebellion that has terrible consequences for all of creation.
Nothing is said about where the serpent came from. The text does not indicate
when or how the serpent became evil. It is clear, however, that evil entered the
created world at some time after God’s “very good” work of creation was
completed (1:31). Unlike the teachings of some other religions, the Bible never
teaches that evil has always existed. See notes on Isa. 14:12–15; Ezek. 28:11–
19.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:2–3 The woman’s response echoes the divine instruction
given in 2:16–17 (see note on 2:17), although she fails to identify the tree
clearly, and she adds, “neither shall you touch it.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:4–5 The serpent directly contradicts what God has said.
He pre­ sents the fruit of the tree as something worth having. By eating it, he
says, Adam and Eve will be like God, knowing good and evil. The irony of
the serpent’s remarks is that Adam and Eve, unlike the serpent, were already
made in the image of God (1:26–27). They are already “like God.” This means
they are expected to exercise authority over all the beasts of the field—
including the serpent! By obeying the serpent, however, they betray the trust
that God has placed in them. You will not surely die. It is sometimes claimed
that the serpent is correct when he says this, for they do not immediately “die.”
Further, their eyes are in fact opened (3:7), and God acknowledges that “the
man has become like one of us in knowing good and evil” (v. 22). Yet the
serpent speaks only half-truths. What Adam and Eve will experience outside of
Eden is not life as God intended. It is spiritual death.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:6 when the woman saw that the tree was good.
Somehow the serpent has made the woman discontented with the permitted
trees (2:16), and she desires instead the forbidden one. Apparently she is
attracted to the tree’s ability to make one wise (see note on 2:17). she also
gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate. As Adam ate what
God had forbidden, he was deliberately rebelling against God. The fact that he
was “with” Eve at the time meant that he had failed to carry out his God-given
responsibility to guard and “keep” both the garden and his wife (see 2:15). The
disastrous consequences of Adam’s sin include the fall of mankind, the
beginning of every kind of sin, suffering, and pain, along with spiritual and
physical death for the entire human race.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:9 the LORD God called to the man . . . , “Where are
you?” Both “man” and “you” are singular in Hebrew. God thus confronts
Adam first, holding him primarily responsible for the sin committed by both
Adam and Eve. Adam is thus treated as the representative or “head” of the
husband-and-wife relationship, established before the fall (see note on Eph.
5:23–24).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:14–15 The serpent is punished for tempting the woman. It
will live in ongoing hostility with the woman, which will be carried on by their
respective offspring.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:15 This verse is usually understood as pointing forward to
the defeat of the serpent by the offspring (that is, a descendant) of the woman.
For this reason, it has been labeled the “Protoevangelium,” that is, the first
announcement of the gospel. While Genesis does not explicitly identify the
serpent with Satan, that is clearly what the apostle John understood (see Rev.
12:9; 20:2). The idea of the woman’s “offspring” is seen again in Gen. 4:25 in
the birth of Seth. The rest of Genesis traces a single line of Seth’s descendants
(see diagram), which will eventually produce a king through whom all the
nations of the earth will be blessed. he shall bruise your head, and you shall
bruise his heel. The use of the singular “he” and “his” suggests that one
particular person (“offspring”) is in view. The promise of this person comes to
fulfillment in Jesus Christ, who is clearly presented in the NT as overcoming
Satan (Heb. 2:14; 1 John 3:8; compare John 12:31). At the same time, he is
“bruised” by Satan at the cross.
The Genealogies of Genesis
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:16 Your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall
rule over you. God originally intended that there would be a complementary
relationship between husband and wife, with the husband in a leadership role
(see note on 2:15–16). But that plan has now been distorted and damaged by
sin. This takes the form of “desire” on the part of the wife and heavy-handed
“rule” on the part of the husband. The Hebrew term here for “desire” appears
again in 4:7, where the Lord says to Cain that sin’s “desire is for you.” Eve will
have the sinful “desire” to oppose Adam and to assert leadership over him. But
Adam will also abandon his God-given role of leading, guarding, and caring
for Eve. Instead, he will have a sinful, distorted desire to “rule” over her. Thus
one of the most tragic results of Adam and Eve’s rebellion against God is
ongoing conflict between husbands and wives, as they both rebel against their
God-given roles and responsibilities in marriage. (See notes on Eph. 5:21–32
for the NT ideal for marriage.)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:17–19 Because he has eaten what was prohibited (v. 6),
Adam will have to struggle to eat in the future. He will no longer enjoy the
garden’s abundance but will have to work the ground from which he was taken
(v. 23; see note on 2:8–9). The punishment is not the work itself (see note on
2:15–16) but rather the hardship and frustration that it will involve. To say that
the ground is cursed and will produce thorns and thistles means that it will
no longer be as productive as it was in Eden.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:19 Because of his sin, the man’s body will return to the
ground, that is, he will die. Death was not a part of the original creation (see
Rom. 5:12). The Bible looks forward to a time when nature will be set free
from death and the other consequences of human sin (Rom. 8:19–22).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:20–21 God’s words of judgment are immediately
followed by two actions that offer hope. First, the man names his wife Eve,
which means “life-giver” (see esv footnote). Second, God makes clothing for
Adam and Eve, which suggests that he still cares for them. Because the
clothing requires the death of an animal, this can be seen as an anticipation of
(1) the system of animal sacrifices that God would later institute to atone for
sin, and (2) the death of Christ as the final atonement for sin.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 3:22–24 God begins a sentence in v. 22 and breaks off
without finishing it. For the man to eat of the tree of life and thus live forever
in his sinful condition is an unbearable thought, and God must waste no time in
preventing it. therefore the LORD God sent him out from the garden. (On
the “tree of life,” see Rev. 2:7; 22:2, 14, 19.) Outside the garden the man will
have to work the ground, but the task of keeping or guarding the garden is now
given to the cherubim (Gen. 3:24).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:2–5 The fact that God had regard for Abel and his
offering, but not for Cain, does not mean that shepherds are better than farmers
or that animal offerings are better than plant offerings. Both kinds of offerings
will be part of the later Levitical system (for offerings of the fruit of the
ground, see Deut. 26:2). This passage and others suggest that God’s
acceptance of Abel and rejection of Cain had to do with the attitudes of their
hearts. Cain’s fundamentally bad heart can be seen in his resentment toward his
brother and in his unloving attitude in the rest of the passage (see also 1 John
3:12). As compared to Cain’s offering, Abel’s offering (from the firstborn of
his flock) is more costly, perhaps expressing greater devotion (see also Heb.
11:4).
FACT
Cherubim (3:24) are angels who guard holy places. They appear in various
places in the Bible. “Cherubim” is the Hebrew plural form of “cherub.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:6–7 The Lord’s words challenge Cain to do better. He still
has the possibility of pleasing God. To do so, however, he must overcome the
power of sin, which is like a wild beast seeking to devour him.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:9 am I my brother’s keeper? Cain denies any
knowledge about his brother and shows no sign of remorse.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:10–12 Because his brother’s blood cries out to God from
the ground, Cain will no longer be able to cultivate the soil. As seen
throughout Scripture, human sin has an impact on the fertility of the earth
(compare 3:17–18).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:13–16 Cain will be alienated from both the ground and
God. He will become a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth. He fears that
others will have such a dread of him that anyone who sees him will kill him.
The precise nature of the mark on Cain is not known, except that it must have
been something visible.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:17 Cain knew his wife. Presumably, Cain married his
sister, since the whole human race descends from Adam and Eve (see 5:4). The
later laws forbidding this practice, such as Lev. 18:9, would not have been
relevant yet.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:18–22 Lamech’s immediate descendants are associated
with animal breeding, music, and metalwork. Whereas Abel is linked to sheep
(v. 2), Jabal raised livestock, which probably included cattle and donkeys, and
possibly camels.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:23–24 Lamech killed a man merely for wounding or
striking him. His response is out of proportion to the injury. sevenfold . . .
seventy-sevenfold. Lamech says that his vengeful response makes him safer
than Cain, who had only God’s protection (v. 15).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 4:25–26 another offspring. Compare “her offspring”
(3:15). At that time people began to call upon the name of the LORD. This
suggests that the birth of Seth marks a new beginning for humanity. It probably
refers to public worship, initially within Adam’s own family circle.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 5:1–6:8 Adam’ s Descendants. This section of Genesis falls
into two parts: 5:1–32 traces a single line of descendants from Adam to Noah,
naming only one person in each generation (see diagram); 6:1–8 provides a
worldwide picture of increasing human wickedness.
Genealogies: Showing Age at Fatherhood and Age at Death
GENESIS—NOTE ON 5:1–32 Most people living after the flood (that is, after chs.
6–9) did not live nearly as long as the people of chs. 1–5 (see chart). This could
have been due to some change in the structure of the earth or in the bodies of
humans (or both) following the flood. Psalm 90:10 describes a normal life span
as 70 or 80 years, which has more or less been the case throughout subsequent
history.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 5:1–2 the book of the generations. This heading differs
from the 10 others that provide the outline for Genesis (see note on 2:4) in that
it refers to a “book.” This was probably something like a clay tablet. The book
is named after Adam. The same Hebrew word is also translated in 5:1 by man
and in 5:2 by Man. The word may function as a proper name, a common noun
referring to a male individual, or a generic noun meaning both males and
females. the likeness of God. See note on 1:27.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 5:3–5 The genealogy of Adam’s family through Seth
contrasts with the seven generations linked to Cain (4:17–18). Instead of saying
that Adam “fathered Seth,” which would be the normal wording for such a
genealogy, the text says that Adam fathered a son in his own likeness, after
his image. This language echoes 1:26–27.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 5:22–24 Enoch walked with God . . . and he was not, for
God took him. The Hebrew verb for “walked” conveys a close relationship
with God (compare 3:8; 6:9; 17:1; 24:40). Remarkably, because of this special
relationship, Enoch does not die (compare 2 Kings 2:1–12).
FACT
Two men who never died. Enoch and Elijah are the only people in the Bible
who did not die a natural death. Instead, they were “taken by God.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 5:28–31 Lamech expects that Noah, whose name means
“rest,” will bring both rest and comfort from the painful toil of working the
soil (see 3:17–19).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:1–2 Although God had commanded mankind to multiply
(1:28), their increasing numbers led to increasing wickedness on the earth. The
problem was worsened by the joining of the sons of God and the daughters of
man. Scholars have proposed at least two interpretations of this passage: (1)
fallen angels were marrying the daughters of man; (2) male descendants of
Seth were marrying the ungodly female descendants of Cain. However one
interprets the passage, it is clear that the relationships described here involved
sexual sin, as men saw and took any women they wanted.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:3 God announces that because of the immoral nature of
people, their days shall be 120 years. This could mean either that the lives of
human beings will no longer exceed 120 years, or that the flood will come in
120 years.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:4 The meaning of Nephilim is not clear. The only other
OT occurrence of the term is in Num. 13:33, where the Israelite spies use it to
describe a group living in Canaan. The Nephilim were mighty men or warriors
and, as such, may well have contributed to the violence that filled the earth (see
Gen. 6:13).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:6–7 The Hebrew word for regretted is sometimes
translated “repent” and sometimes as “feel sorrow” or “be grieved.” God is
grieved over his creation, which he at first saw as very good (1:31) but which
is now filled with sin (see note on 1 Sam. 15:29).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:9–9:29 Noah’ s Descendants. Chapters 6–9 describe a
flood that leads to a renewal of the earth—a reminder of the creation account of
1:1–2:3. But while the land is cleansed and God makes a new start possible,
human nature has not changed. This is clearly seen in the final verses of these
chapters (9:20–29).
FACT
Favor in the eyes of the Lord. “Favor” (6:8) is another word for God’s grace.
Of all the people living at the time of the flood, only Noah and his family
found favor in God’s sight.
NOAH
Noah was a righteous man who faithfully walked with God despite the
wickedness of his generation. When God chose to destroy the earth because
of its hopeless corruption, Noah alone found favor in his eyes. God
instructed Noah to build an ark that would keep him and his family safe
during the coming flood. Noah also took representative pairs of each kind of
animal with him into the ark, to replenish the earth after the flood. God made
a covenant with Noah, promising that he would never again destroy the earth
with a flood. The NT calls Noah a “herald of righteousness” (2 Pet. 2:5).
(Genesis 6:7–8)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:9 Noah’s personal righteousness explains why he is
warned about the forthcoming deluge. Blameless conveys the idea of being
without evident fault, though not necessarily sinless. walked with God. See
note on 5:22–24.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:11–12 In contrast to Noah, the earth was corrupt in
God’s sight. These verses confirm vv. 1–7. Here the emphasis is on the
violence that fills the earth. Compare “bondage to corruption” (Rom. 8:21): the
creation suffers because of mankind’s sin.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:15 In modern measurements, the ark would have been
around 450 feet (140 m) long, 75 feet (23 m) wide, and 45 feet (14 m) high,
displacing about 43,000 tons (about 39 million kg). The inside capacity would
have been 1.4 million cubic feet (39,644 cubic m), with an approximate total
deck area of 95,700 square feet (8,891 square m).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:17 Everything that is on the earth shall die. This does
not necessarily mean that the flood had to cover the whole earth. Since the
geographical perspective of ancient people was more limited, it is possible that
the flood, while universal from their viewpoint, did not cover the entire globe.
Genesis implies that prior to the Tower of Babel incident (see 11:1–9), people
had not yet spread throughout the earth. Many interpreters argue that a huge
regional flood may have been all that was necessary for God to destroy all
humans. The expression “all the earth” (7:3; compare 8:9, “the whole earth”)
does not exclude such a possibility. Later, “all the earth” came to Joseph to buy
grain (41:57); here, “all the earth” clearly refers to the eastern Mediterranean
seaboard. To support the view that the flood did in fact cover the entire globe,
other interpreters point out that the text says “all the high mountains under the
whole heaven were covered” (7:19) and that the water was “fifteen cubits”
above the tops of the mountains. If “the mountains of Ararat” (8:4) refers to the
range that includes present-day Mount Ararat in Turkey (elevation 16,854 feet
or 5,137 m), the amount of water necessary to cover it would be at least 16,854
feet above sea level.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 6:18–22 God indicates that he will establish a covenant
with Noah (see note on 9:9–11).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 7:1–5 On the distinction between clean and not clean
creatures, see Lev. 11:1–47 and Deut. 14:4–20. Since after the flood some
clean animals will be offered as sacrifices (see Gen. 8:20) and some will be
eaten as food (see 9:3), it was necessary to have more than one pair of each
kind in the ark.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 7:11–12 The exact dates given for the flood (see 8:4–5, 13–
14) show that it was a real event. all the fountains of the great deep burst
forth, and the windows of the heavens were opened. From below and above,
water poured out to cover the land.
FACT
Why did Noah take seven pairs of each clean animal but only one pair of
each unclean animal? After the flood, some clean animals were needed for
making sacrifices and for food. To ensure their survival, it was necessary to
have more than one pair of each kind in the ark.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 7:16 The safety of those in the ark depended on both human
and divine action. the LORD shut him in. The use of the personal name
“Yahweh” (“LORD”; see note on 2:4) emphasizes God’s special relationship
with Noah.
Chronology of Noah’ s Time in the Ark
Dates are in the form of month, day, and Noah’s year, as given in the text.
Hence, 2/10/600 means the tenth day of the second month in Noah’s 600th
year. Months are calculated at 30 days each. Dates in parentheses are guesses
based on dates given in the text.
Reference Event Date Day
7:4, 10 Announcement of the flood 7 days in advance 7:11, 13 Flood begins; Noah and family enter the ark Waters prevail: 150-day
period
7:12 Flood lasts 40 days and ends (2/10/600) Sunday
2/17/600 Sunday
(3/27/600) Friday
8:4 Ark rests on mountains of Ararat after waters prevail and abate for 150
days total 7/17/600 Friday
8:5 Mountaintops eventually become visible 10/1/600 Wednesday
8:7 Raven sent out (after 40 days of mountaintop visibility) (11/10/600) Sunday
Waters abate: 150-day
period
8:8 Dove sent out (11/17/600) Sunday
8:10 Dove’s second flight (7 days later); returns with olive leaf (11/24/600) Sunday
8:12 Dove’s third flight (7 days later); does not return (12/1/600) Sunday
8:3 Waters fully abated; end of second 150-day period (12/17/600) Wednesday
Earth dries: 70-day period 8:13 Noah eventually removes the covering of the ark 1/1/601 Wednesday
8:14–19 Earth dried out; Noah leaves ark 2/27/601 Wednesday
Total time in ark: 370 days
GENESIS—NOTE ON 7:17–24 the waters prevailed on the earth 150 days (v.
24). The figure of 150 days, which includes the 40 days of rain mentioned in v.
12, is repeated in 8:3 (see chart). In both places it refers to the five-month
period between the detailed chronology in 7:11 (at the very start of the flood,
on the 17th day of the second month) and 8:4 (when the ark comes to rest on
the 17th day of the seventh month). It will be an additional seven months
before the land is sufficiently dry for those in the ark to leave it safely (see
8:13–14). On the depth of the flood (above the mountains), see note on 6:17.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 8:1 God remembered Noah. When the Bible says that God
“remembers” someone or that he remembers his covenant with someone, it
means he is about to act for that person’s welfare (see 9:15; 19:29; 30:22; Ex.
2:24; 32:13). God proceeds to renew everything, echoing what he did in
Genesis 1. God made a wind blow over the earth. The Hebrew word for
“wind” is also sometimes translated “Spirit” (e.g., 1:2; 6:3).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 8:2–4 In v. 2 God reverses the process started in 7:11. The
waters both rose and fell during the period of 150 days (see note on 7:17–24).
Mountains of Ararat indicates a range of mountains of which Mount Ararat
(in modern Turkey) is the highest. The text does not name the specific
mountain on which the ark came to rest.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 8:20–22 Noah’s burnt offering is intended to express
gratitude for divine deliverance. It is also an act of atonement. Despite the
human tendency to sin, atonement through sacrifice is possible, resulting in a
peaceful relationship between the Lord and humanity. I will never again curse
the ground means that God will not send another flood. He is not revoking the
curse pronounced in 3:17, which continues (the words for “curse” in these two
verses are different; see esv footnote). These verses show the importance of
sacrifice in the Bible’s plan of salvation.
FACT
Extending an olive branch. The universal symbol for peace—a dove with an
olive branch—is based on the Bible story of the flood (8:11).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 9:1–4 The earlier positive instruction that humans should
exercise authority over the other living creatures (1:28–30) is replaced by the
negative comment that those creatures will fear and dread humans. God now
permits the taking of animal life for food (in contrast to 1:30, where man and
animals are given “every green plant” for food). However, the animal’s blood
remains sacred and is not to be consumed; this is because the blood is the
source of life, and all life is from God (see Lev. 17:12–14).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 9:5–6 From his fellow man I will require a reckoning for
the life of man. Any animal or person that takes a human life will be held
accountable by God (see Ex. 20:13; 21:28). Whoever sheds the blood of man,
by man shall his blood be shed. Human life is to be valued so highly because
God made man in his own image. To murder another human being is to
murder what is most like God, and is thus like an attack on God himself. Many
see this as permitting the death penalty for murder—with the understanding
that the person’s guilt has been established beyond any reasonable doubt (thus
the requirement of two or three witnesses, Deut. 19:15). A further requirement
is that such a death sentence must always be carried out by the established
authorities (see Deut. 19:15–21; Rom. 13:1–5).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 9:9–11 This is the first covenant explicitly named in
Genesis. A covenant formally binds two parties together in a relationship, with
consequences for keeping or breaking the covenant. God makes this kind of
covenant with a group of people through one person who represents the entire
group. Everyone else then experiences the covenant by being included “in” the
representative (see note on 12:3). Emphasizing that this particular covenant is
for all living creatures, God states that there will never again be a flood to
destroy the earth.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 9:12–17 The rainbow will be a reminder of God’s
everlasting covenant. This does not mean that rainbows did not exist till this
time.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 9:20 The reference to Noah as a man of the soil and his
success in growing vines points to a fresh start after the flood (see note on
5:28–31).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 9:21–23 became drunk. The brevity of the description of
Noah’s drunkenness indicates God’s disapproval. Ham’s actions of looking on
the nakedness of his father in the tent and then reporting this to his brothers
bring serious criticism. There is no indication that perverse sexual behavior
was involved. Though the text does not explicitly state what happened, it is
clear that Ham humiliated and dishonored his father, and apparently he
involved his brothers in that humiliation.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 9:24–27 The designation of Ham as the youngest son is
peculiar, since he is always listed after Shem and before Japheth. Possibly the
traditional order of names does not reflect the birth sequence of the boys.
Cursed be Canaan. Noah’s reaction to Ham’s action is to curse Canaan,
Ham’s son. a servant of servants shall he be. This passage was wrongly used
in past centuries to justify the enslavement of African people, resulting in
grievous abuse, injustice, and inhumanity to people created in the image of
God. Noah’s curse of Canaan, which focuses on his being a servant, anticipates
the judgment that will later befall the Canaanites (compare Deut. 7:1–3 with
Gen. 10:15–19). This, coupled with the fact that the curse falls on Canaan
alone and not on Ham’s other children (who settled in northern Africa), shows
how illegitimate it was to use this text to justify enslaving African people. (For
more about biblical teaching on slavery, see notes on 1 Cor. 7:21; Eph. 6:5;
Col. 3:22–25; 1 Tim. 1:10.) Shem is highlighted in Noah’s remark that Japheth
will dwell in the tents of Shem (Gen. 9:27).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 10:1–11:9 The Descendants of Noah’ s Sons. The next main
section of Genesis shows how humanity becomes divided into different
nations.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 10:1–32 This passage shows how the descendants of Noah’s
three sons populated different regions of the earth, forming nations. This
process covered a long time, as families migrated to particular regions.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 10:2–5 From these the coastland peoples spread. This
places Japheth’s descendants in the coastal regions and islands of the Med-
iterra­ nean Sea.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 10:6–20 Many of Israel’s enemies, such as the Egyptians,
Babylonians, Philistines, and various Canaanite groups, descended from Ham.
Cush and Put are regions south and west of Egypt, respectively. Cush
fathered Nimrod (v. 8). This may seem unusual since Cush is linked
geographically with Africa, and Nimrod with the great cities of Babel and
Nineveh in Assyria. The military might of the Assyrians and Babylonians may
account for the observations that Nimrod was a mighty man and a mighty
hunter (vv. 8, 9). These descriptions are probably to be viewed negatively.
Nimrod’s aggression runs totally counter to God’s intentions. Babel . . . in the
land of Shinar (v. 10). These details link Nimrod with the Tower of Babel
episode (11:2, 9). Nimrod’s kingdom is the opposite of what God desired. The
great city (10:12) probably refers to a region that included both Nineveh and
Calah (see Jonah 3:3). “Canaanite” is sometimes used to cover all the different
groups mentioned in Gen. 10:15–19 (e.g., 28:1).
Table of Nations
c. 2200 B.C.
Many of the people groups mentioned in Genesis 10 can be identified with relative certainty. In general,
the descendants of Ham settled in North Africa and the eastern Mediterranean coast, the descendants of
Shem in Mesopotamia and Arabia, and the descendants of Japheth in Europe and the greater area of Asia
Minor.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 10:21–32 Abraham was descended from Shem. Many of
Shem’s descendants are Arabian tribes or kingdoms. Shem’s great-grandson
Eber receives special attention (v. 21), being mentioned even before Shem’s
own sons are named (v. 22). The designation “Hebrew” (see 14:13) is derived
from “Eber.” He called one of his sons Peleg (which could mean “division”),
for in his days the earth was divided (10:25). This is probably a reference to
the Tower of Babel (11:1–9).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:1–9 The story of the Tower of Babel is more important
than its length suggests. It tells of a unified humanity using all its resources to
establish a city that is the antithesis of what God intended when he created the
world. The city builders see themselves as establishing their own destiny
without any reference to the Lord.
The Generations of Genesis
Primeval History (1:1–11:26)
Introduction General heading Specific heading Section introduced
2:4 These are the generations of the heavens and the earth 2:4–4:26
5:1 These are the generations of Adam 5:1–6:8
6:9 These are the generations of Noah 6:9–9:29
10:1 These are the generations of the sons of Noah 10:1–11:9
11:10 These are the generations of Shem 11:10–26
Patriarchal History (11:27–50:26)
11:27 These are the generations of Terah 11:27–25:11
25:12 These are the generations of Ishmael 25:12–18
25:19 These are the generations of Isaac 25:19–35:29
36:1, 9 These are the generations of Esau 36:1–37:1
37:2 These are the generations of Jacob 37:2–50:26
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:1 The description of the whole earth having one
language indicates that the present episode happens before the events in ch. 10,
which specifically mentions nations and languages. It may have occurred
during the period covered in ch. 10, especially if it is linked to the naming of
Peleg in 10:25 (see note on 10:21–32).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:2–4 Come, . . . let us make a name for ourselves.
Contrary to God’s plan that humanity should fill the earth (e.g., 1:22, 28; 9:1,
7), the builders of Babel want to prevent the population from being dispersed
over . . . the whole earth (11:4).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:9 This verse links the name of the city, Babel, with the
verb that means “to confuse, to mix, to mingle.” This is also the name used in
the OT for the city of Babylon. Babylon symbolizes humanity’s ambition to
dethrone God and make the earth its own (see Revelation 17–18).
FACT
Sinful pride and rebellion against God brought negative consequences to the
builders of the Tower of Babel, introducing the many languages that now
exist around the world.
FACT
What did the Tower of Babel look like? The Tower of Babel (11:1–9)
probably resembled the ziggurats of ancient Mesopotamia. The most famous
of these is the Great Ziggurat of Ur. Its remains can be seen today in
southeastern Iraq.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:10–26 Shem’ s Descendants. Resembling the list of
Adam’s descendants in 5:3–31, this genealogy traces Noah’s line through Shem
down to Terah, the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran (see diagram). The
length of time these men live is much shorter than for men living before the
flood (see 5:1–32; see chart).
The City of Ur
The ancient city of Ur lies 186 miles (300 km) southeast of modern Baghdad on a bend of the original
course of the Euphrates River. Major excavations took place at the site in 1922–1934 under the direction
of Sir Leonard Woolley. Ur became an important city in Mesopotamia near the end of the third
millennium B.C. The governor of Ur, a man named Ur-Nammu (c. 2113–2095 B.C.), brought the city to
great prominence. He took the titles “King of Ur, King of Sumer and Akkad.” Thus was founded the Third
Dynasty of Ur (2113–2006 B.C.). This period was one of great peace and prosperity, the high point of the
city’ s existence. This diagram of the city represents the Third Dynasty of Ur, and it includes a central
palace and a temple complex. The latter has as its center the Ziggurat of Ur-Nammu that is dedicated to
the moon god Nanna. Ur was the birthplace of the Hebrew patriarch Abraham (Gen. 11:27–32), and the
plan below represents the city that he would have been familiar with.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:27–50:26 Patriarchal History. The story now
moves from the general survey of humanity to the specific family from
which Israel comes.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:27–25:18 Terah’ s Descendants. These chapters focus on
the immediate family of Terah, paying special attention to Abram. Abram will
later have his name changed to “Abraham” (see 17:5).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:28 Ur of the Chaldeans was a city in southern
Babylonia, the remains of which are located in modern Iraq.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:29 The name Sarai is later changed to “Sarah” (see
17:15). The initial inability of the patriarchs’ wives to have children is a
recurring theme in Genesis (see 25:21; 29:31).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:31–32 Haran was an important crossroads and
commercial center in the ancient Near East.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 11:31 Although Terah’s ambition is to move his family
from Ur to Canaan, they settle instead in northern Mesopotamia at Haran (in
modern-day Turkey). The spelling of the town name “Haran” in Hebrew is
quite distinct from the name of Terah’s third son, also named Haran. This is the
Bible’s first reference to “the land of Canaan.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:1–3 Through Abram, all the families of the earth will
be blessed. This marks an important turning point in Genesis, as it reverses the
predominantly negative implications of chs. 3–11.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:1 said. In Acts 7:2–3, Stephen says that God called
Abram before he lived in Haran; the esv footnote, “had said,” shows that the
grammar allows for this interpretation.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:2 make your name great. This was the failed goal of
the tower builders (11:4).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:3 Although Abram is called to be a blessing to others,
much depends on how they will treat him. The text speaks of those who bless
(plural) but of him who dishonors (singular), emphasizing that many more
will be blessed than cursed. This promise that the nations will be blessed
through Abraham is later reaffirmed to Isaac and Jacob (see 22:18; 26:4;
28:14). in you. This may simply indicate “by means of you,” but more likely
this expression designates Abram as the covenantal representative for a people.
To be “in” some person is to be a member of the group that person represents
(see 2 Sam. 20:1).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:4 So Abram went. Abram’s response to God’s call was
immediate and unquestioning. Lot went with him. Abram may have been
responsible for Lot after the death of Haran (11:27–28). By this time Lot was a
wealthy adult (see 13:5–6).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:5 the people that they had acquired in Haran. Abram
had under his authority a substantial number of men; many of them may have
been herdsmen (see 13:7). Genesis 14:14 mentions 318 trained men “born in
his household,” and 17:12 refers to males whom Abram has bought with
money from a foreigner. Abram migrates with everything he possesses from
northern Mesopotamia to Canaan.
Abram Travels to Canaan
c. 2091 B.C.
Abram was born in Ur, a powerful city in southern Babylonia. Abram’ s father, Terah, eventually led the
family toward the land of Canaan but decided to settle in Haran (see Gen. 11:27–31). After Terah’ s death,
the Lord called Abram to go “to the land that I will show you” (Canaan), which he promises to give to
Abram’ s descendants.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:6 Shechem is the first of a number of locations in
Canaan associated with Abram. the oak of Moreh. As a seminomadic
herdsman traveling with a large group, Abram probably camped away from
urban areas; these locations are identified by distinctive natural features (e.g.,
trees; see 13:18). At that time the Canaanites were in the land. Other people
already occupied the land when Abram arrived.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:7 the LORD appeared. This is the first of a number of
times that God shows himself to the patriarchs. altar to the LORD. Altars were
common places for worshiping God in the patriarchal period because no central
sanctuary existed.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:8 From Shechem, Abram migrates southward to a
location between Bethel and Ai, before going much farther in the direction of
Egypt.
FACT
Altars were tables or platforms used for presenting sacrifices to God. They
could be built of stone, mud-brick, or dirt mounds. The first altar mentioned
in the Bible is the one Noah built after the flood (8:20; see also 12:8).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:9 The Negeb is the southern region of Canaan.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:10–20 A severe famine in Canaan forces Abram to seek
refuge in Egypt. Because of the Nile River, Egypt was a more likely place than
Canaan to find food during a drought. As is common in biblical stories, the
narrator offers no moral evaluation of the participants’ actions.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:11–13 Abram devises a plan, based on a half-truth (see
20:12), implying that he thinks God is unable to protect him. Yet when the plot
backfires, the Lord rescues him (12:17).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:15 Pharaoh is the title of the king of Egypt, not a
personal name.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:16 To own camels, Abram must have been wealthy,
since they were scarce in this time and place.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 12:17 Plagues on Pharaoh and his house will be seen
again in the exodus from Egypt, when God will punish another pharaoh for his
mistreatment of Abram’s descendants.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 13:1–18 Expelled from Egypt, Abram retraces his steps
northward, through the Negeb, back to the hill country between Bethel and Ai
where he had previously built an altar (12:8). Competition for pasture soon
leads to strife between the herdsmen of Abram and Lot. When Abram offers
Lot first choice of the land, Lot chooses the fertile Jordan Valley. Afterward,
the Lord reaffirms that Abram’s descendants will possess all of Canaan.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 13:7 The scarcity of pastureland may have been related to
the fact that the Canaanites and the Perizzites were dwelling in the land.
Compare the similar statement in 12:6.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 13:10 the Jordan Valley was well watered everywhere.
Lot’s experience with the effects of famine (12:10, probably from drought)
makes his choice of the fertile Jordan Valley understandable. like the garden
of the LORD. A reference to the garden of Eden, which was also well watered
(see 2:10). This description of the Jordan Valley predates the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah (chs. 18–19), which may well have made this area less
suitable for flocks and herds.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 13:11–13 Lot’s decision to settle among the cities of the
valley brings him into the vicinity of Sodom.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 13:14–17 At this stage, Abram still has no children.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 13:18 Abram relocates near Hebron (also known as
Kiriath-arba; see 23:2), setting up his tent by the oaks of Mamre. Since one of
Abram’s allies is “Mamre the Amorite” (14:13), the oaks are probably named
after him. altar. See note on 12:7. At this time, Hebron was a major settlement
in the Judean hills, covering between six and seven acres.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:1–24 After separating from Abram and settling in
Sodom, Lot is taken captive by an alliance of four kings who invade the Jordan
Valley. Abram gathers a small army and recovers Lot, leading to an interesting
encounter with the king of Salem.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:3 The Salt Sea is the Dead Sea.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:4 After twelve years of being ruled by others, the kings
of the Jordan Valley gain independence for one year.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:5–7 Under the leadership of Chedorlaomer, the
invading kings defeat several tribal groups. The six locations reveal that the
invaders moved southward along the King’s Highway in Transjordan as far as
the Gulf of Aqaba before turning northward. They eventually arrive at
Hazazon-tamar, also known as Engedi (see 2 Chron. 20:2).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:13–16 Abram the Hebrew. This is the first occurrence
of the term “Hebrew” in the Bible (see note on 10:21–32). The town of Laish
in northern Canaan was later renamed Dan (14:14; see Judg. 18:29). The use of
the name “Dan” here indicates that this account was edited sometime later. A
nighttime assault allows Abram’s forces to overcome their opponents, who flee
northward.
FACT
Non-Levite Priests? Melchizedek (14:17–21) and Jesus Christ are the only
approved priests in the Bible who were not Levites. The NT book of
Hebrews explains why this is important.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:17–24 This passage emphasizes Abram’s reliance on
God rather than on military might to gain possession of Canaan.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:17 The Valley of Shaveh, also known as the King’s
Valley, lay to the east of Jerusalem (see 2 Sam. 18:18).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:18 Melchizedek (which means “king of righteousness”;
see Heb. 7:2) generously provides a meal for the returning victors. Salem is
possibly a shortened version of “Jerusalem” (see Ps. 76:2) and is related to
shalom, the Hebrew word for “peace” (see Heb. 7:2). He was priest of God
Most High. Although very little is known about Melchizedek, he provides an
interesting example of a priest-king linked to Jerusalem. See Heb. 5:5–10;
6:20–7:17 for a study of Jesus Christ as belonging to the “order of
Melchizedek.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:19–20 Melchizedek’s blessing praises God for giving
Abram victory. When Abram gives Melchizedek a tenth of everything (that is,
a tithe), he shows that he believes what Melchizedek says.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 14:22 the LORD, God Most High. By combining the divine
name “Yahweh” (translated “LORD”; see note on 2:4) with ’El ‘Elyon, “God
Most High,” Abram indicates that Yahweh and ’El ‘Elyon are one and the same
deity.
MELCHIZEDEK
Melchizedek is among the most mysterious figures in Scripture. King of
Salem, a city identified with Jerusalem, and “priest of God Most High,”
Melchizedek’s name means “king of righteousness.” Following Abraham’s
defeat of Chedorlaomer and his rescue of Lot, Melchizedek provided a meal
of bread and wine for Abraham and his men. He then blessed Abraham,
attributing Abraham’s victory over his enemies to God Most High. In
response to Melchizedek’s blessing, Abraham gave the priest-king a tenth of
everything he had. David mentions Melchizedek in the messianic Psalm 110,
and the writer of Hebrews presents Melchizedek as a foreshadowing of Jesus
Christ, who is both priest and king. (Genesis 14:18–20)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:1–21 Verses 1–6 of ch. 15 focus on Abram’s concern that
he is still childless; vv. 7–21 focus on his desire for assurance that the land of
Canaan will belong to his descendants. God’s conditional promise in 12:2 that
Abram will become a “great nation” is now guaranteed by a covenant, although
the fulfillment will not take place until several centuries after Abram’s death.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:1 In ch. 14 Abram rejected the victory spoils that the
king of Sodom offered. In response (After these things), God states that
Abram’s reward shall be very great.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:2 the heir of my house is Eliezer of Damascus. This
individual is not named elsewhere. The context suggests he is a trusted member
of Abram’s household, possibly a slave.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:6 This key verse in Genesis is quoted four times in the
NT (Rom. 4:3, 22; Gal. 3:6; James 2:23). Faith in God requires trusting him
(see notes on John 1:12–13; Heb. 11:1), based on the truthfulness of his words.
Faith in God leads to obeying his commands. Abram believed God would give
him a son despite many years of childlessness. counted . . . as righteousness.
Before Abram has shown himself righteous by his deeds, God sees him as
righteous because of his faith.
FACT
Abram believed the LORD, and that was the basis for God counting him as
righteous. Such faith remains the basis for God’s justification of Christians
in the NT (Gal. 2:16).
ABRAHAM
God called Abraham to leave his native country for a land that he would
show him. When Abraham arrived in Canaan, God promised to give the land
to him and his descendants, who would become the nation of Israel. The
Lord promised that the whole world would be blessed through Abraham and
his descendants. Abraham faced the ultimate test of faith when God
commanded him to sacrifice his son Isaac. Because Abraham was willing to
do so, God once again promised to bless him and to multiply his offspring.
God spared Isaac from death by providing a substitute sacrifice,
foreshadowing the substitutionary death of Christ on the cross. (Genesis
15:5–6)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:9–17 The ritual described here is possibly a type of oath.
God is saying that he will become like the dead animals if he does not keep his
word (see Jer. 34:18–20). Another interpretation is that the sacrificial animals
symbolize Abram’s descendants and the “birds of prey” (Gen. 15:11) signify
their enemies (unclean nations).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:13–16 Four hundred years appears to be a round
figure. and afterward they shall come out with great possessions. The
Lord’s promise to Abram was fulfilled 600 to 800 years later at the time of the
exodus. for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete. The Amorites
are one of the main groups living in Canaan (vv. 19–21) and are descendants of
Ham (see notes on ch. 10). God’s comment implies that the Amorites’ land will
be taken as an act of punishment for their sin. See note on Josh. 6:17–18.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:17 The smoking fire pot and flaming torch symbolize
God’s presence, which is often associated with fire (e.g., Ex. 13:21–22).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 15:18–21 On that day the LORD made a covenant with
Abram. This covenant differs from the one described in ch. 17. (On covenants,
see note on 9:9–11.) God unconditionally pledges that Abram’s offspring will
possess this land, linking this covenant with the earlier conditional promise
that Abram would become a great nation (12:2). from the river of Egypt to
the great river, the river Euphrates. The designation “river of Egypt” is
unclear. It could refer to the Wadi el Arish (midway between Israel and the
Nile). Or, “river” could refer to the eastern branch of the Nile. This promise
was probably fulfilled for a time in the reign of Solomon (see 1 Kings 4:21).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:1–16 Sarai seeks to resolve the problem of her
barrenness by having her maidservant, Hagar, bear a child on her behalf.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:2 Abram listened to the voice of Sarai may mean that
he gave in too readily to his wife’s request (see v. 6).
FACT
Taking servants as wives. It was common in ancient cultures for a married
man to take a servant as a wife (16:2). But this was contrary to God’s
original design for marriage (2:24).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:3 as a wife. Hagar’s status within Abram’s household is
changed from servant to wife, although this does not place her on a par with
Sarai (see note on 25:5–6). While the OT records occasions of polygamy, these
relationships are usually difficult and are never encouraged in the Bible (see
2:24; Deut. 17:17).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:5–7 Sarai initially directs her anger at Abram, and he
allows her to deal harshly with Hagar. The human solution to Sarai’s
childlessness creates new problems.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:7 The angel of the LORD. The Hebrew word for “angel”
may also be translated “messenger.” There is something mysterious about this
figure. In 19:1 the “two angels” who arrive at Sodom resemble human beings
(in 18:2 they are called “men”). When “the angel of the LORD” speaks, his
words are perceived as being God’s words, giving the impression that the angel
is identical with God. On this basis, some Christians believe this is the
preincarnate Christ. the spring on the way to Shur. Hagar’s escape takes her
toward Egypt, her homeland. The location of the spring/well is clarified in
16:14, when it is named “Beer-lahai-roi.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:9 God commands Hagar to have a better attitude toward
her mistress, Sarai. Instead of despising her, she is to submit to her authority.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:11–12 Ishmael means “God hears.” God has observed
Hagar’s suffering. The angel promises Hagar that her son will not need to serve
others. However, he will live a life of hostility toward others.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:13 here I have seen him who looks after me. Although
this could imply that Hagar actually saw God, it could also mean she
understands that God sees or “looks after” her. He is the God of seeing.
ISHMAEL
Ishmael was Abraham’s eldest son. His mother was Hagar, the maidservant
of Abraham’s wife Sarah. Ishmael was around 16 years old when his half-
brother, Isaac, was born. Sarah overheard Ishmael mocking his younger
brother, so she angrily expelled Hagar and Ishmael from her household and
sent them to wander in the desert. God protected them, however, and
promised that Ishmael would become a great nation. Ishmael grew to be
strongly independent and, as the Lord had prophesied, he lived a life of
hostility toward others. Ishmael settled in the wilderness of Paran, where he
became an expert archer. Because Ishmael was Abraham’s son, God blessed
him. He had 12 sons, who became princes of 12 tribes. (Genesis 16:11–12)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:14 Beer-lahai-roi means “well of the Living One who
sees me.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:15 By naming Ishmael, Abram publicly acknowledges
him as his son and heir.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 16:16 eighty-six years old. Ishmael was born 11 years after
Abram settled in Canaan.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:1–27 Thirteen years after the birth of Ishmael, the Lord
appears to Abram and announces that he will establish an eternal covenant with
Abram and his offspring. Abram will become the father of many nations. The
sign of the covenant is circumcision. The covenant will be established with
Isaac but not Ishmael (although Ishmael, by being circumcised, will enjoy
some of the benefits of the covenant).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:1–2 God Almighty. Like many other names for God in
Genesis, the common Semitic word for “God” is followed by a particular
attribute of God. This name emphasizes God’s power, which will enable Sarai
to bear a son. that I may make my covenant. Unlike the unconditional
covenant in ch. 15, here a condition is clear: walk before God and be blameless
(see note on 17:19).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:4–5 the father of a multitude of nations. These words
summarize the covenant being established by God. To underline their
importance, the words are repeated at the end of v. 5: your name shall be
Abraham, for I have made you the father of a multitude of nations.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:6 I will make you exceedingly fruitful. This promise
echoes the divine blessing given at creation (1:28) and later repeated to Noah
after the flood (9:1). kings shall come from you. Fruitfulness includes
exercising authority over the earth on God’s behalf (1:28; 9:1–7).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:10 Circumcision was not a Hebrew invention. For
example, it was used in Egypt as an act of ritual purity.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:11 You shall be circumcised in the flesh of your
foreskins. Circumcision, cutting off the foreskin of the penis, creates a mark
that would not normally be visible to others.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:12–13 eight days old. To ensure that the covenant
extends to the next generation, all newborn male children are to be circumcised
eight days after they are born. The covenant is not about establishing racial
purity, since males who are not Abraham’s offspring are included.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:14 shall be cut off from his people. Uncircumcised
males were excluded from the benefits of the covenant. Circumcision
distinguished those who believed in the importance of God’s promises to
Abraham from those who did not. For the NT view on circumcision, see Rom.
2:25–29; 1 Cor. 7:18–19; and Gal. 6:15.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:15–16 The name Sarai is changed to Sarah; both forms
mean “princess.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:19 Isaac means “he laughs.” The theme of laughter
occurs in several passages associated with the birth of Isaac. See v. 17; 18:12–
15; 21:6, 9. I will establish my covenant with him. While Ishmael and the
other male members of Abraham’s household are also circumcised, the
covenant will continue through Isaac (see 17:7, 20–21; and chart). This line
eventually leads to Jesus Christ, through whom God’s blessing comes to the
nations.
SARAH
Sarah was Abraham’s wife and was also his half-sister. On two occasions, to
save himself from possible danger, Abraham said that Sarah was his “sister,”
failing to mention that she was also his wife. After many years of not being
able to bear children, Sarah encouraged Abraham to start a family with her
maidservant, Hagar. This plan backfired when, upon conceiving, Hagar
became condescending toward Sarah. Later, God promised Abraham that he
would give him a son through Sarah. Since she was 90 years old at the time,
and Abraham himself was 100, Sarah’s initial response to the promise was
laughter. However, one year later, Sarah gave birth to Isaac, the child of
promise. She thus became an ancestor of Christ. (Genesis 17:15–16)
FACT
Isaac means “he laughs.” When Abraham and Sarah heard that they were
going to have a son in their old age, they both laughed (17:17; 18:12). When
Isaac was born, however, they and all their friends laughed with joy (21:6)!
Four Kinds of Abraham’ s Offspring
Offspring Explanation Examples
Natural, physical
Physical descendants of Abraham offspring
Ishmael, Isaac, the sons of Keturah (and by extension Esau, Jacob, etc.)
Natural, yet
special offspring
Physical descendants of Abraham
especially tied to God’s elective and saving
purposes
Isaac (by extension Jacob and the entire nation of Israel)
Promised
offspring
The true, unique offspring of Abraham
A distinctive line of offspring, starting earlier with Seth and continuing
through Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Israel, and David, culminating in Jesus
Christ (Gal. 3:16)
Spiritual
offspring
Those united with Christ (the promised
offspring) Jews and Gentiles who trust in the Messiah
GENESIS—NOTE ON 17:20 God blesses Ishmael with the promise that he will
become a great nation (see 25:12–18), even though God favors the yet-to-be-
born Isaac.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:1–15 The Lord appears to Abraham and announces that
Sarah will bear a son, about this time next year.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:1 Although Abram settled at the oaks of Mamre many
years earlier (13:18), he is still dwelling in a tent (see Heb. 11:9).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:2 Abraham’s actions suggest that he viewed the three
men as very important. he ran. In the Middle East, a socially prominent
elderly man would not normally respond in this way. bowed himself to the
earth. While this may have been a common greeting (see 19:1), it shows that
Abraham regards the visitors as worthy of great respect.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:3 O Lord. The term here is a distinctive one for God in
the OT (e.g., 20:4). The polite term of respect “my lord” (e.g., 23:6) has a
slight difference of spelling in Hebrew. Clearly Abraham recognizes that one of
his visitors is divine.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:4–8 Although Abraham speaks of a little water and a
morsel of bread, he prepares a large meal. The writer of Hebrews was
probably thinking of the events of vv. 2–8 and 19:1–3 when he wrote of people
who had “entertained angels unawares” (Heb. 13:2).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:11 The way of women had ceased to be with Sarah.
She has ceased to have menstrual cycles, indicating that her reproductive years
have ended.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:12 Sarah honors Abraham with a title of dignity and
respect: my lord. First Peter 3:6 notes this, indicating that she is submitting to
and obeying her husband.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:16–19:29 The Lord reveals to Abraham his plan to
destroy Sodom and then carries out that plan. Through Abraham’s intercession,
Lot and his two daughters escape. The city’s destruction is fully justified
because of its overwhelming wickedness (compare 13:13).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:17–19 God tells Abraham what he is about to do, since
Abraham has a unique role to fulfill regarding his own descendants and all the
nations of the earth.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:21 I will go down to see. This remark does not mean
that God’s knowledge is limited (compare 11:5). It simply means he is giving
his direct attention to the matter.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:23–25 Abraham’s response is probably prompted by his
concern for Lot. Abraham wonders if God intends to destroy the righteous
along with the wicked.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 18:26–33 God eventually affirms that for the sake of ten I
will not destroy Sodom (v. 32). He assures Abraham that he will not punish
the righteous along with the wicked.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:1–3 The two angels. These are the two men who
accompanied the Lord in ch. 18 but then separated from him (see 18:22). Lot
was sitting in the gate of Sodom. These verses parallel the opening verses of
ch. 18. Like Abraham, Lot greets the two men by bowing before them, offering
them hospitality. There is no report of his wife assisting him. Unleavened
bread implies it was baked in haste. By resembling Abraham’s earlier actions,
Lot demonstrates that he is righteous, unlike the men of Sodom.
FACT
The city gate was a place where leaders made key decisions (Prov. 31:23;
Lam. 5:14). Lot’s presence at the city gate (Gen. 19:1) shows that he had a
position of importance in Sodom.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:4 the men of the city. Every male in Sodom, it seems,
both young and old, was involved in the attempted rape of the two visitors.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:5 that we may know them. In Hebrew the verb “to
know” sometimes implies sexual intercourse (e.g., 4:1, 17, 25; 19:8; compare
Judg. 19:22). The context suggests that the men of Sodom intend to have
homosexual relations with the two visitors, hence the origin of the term
“sodomy.” By acting so wickedly against defenseless strangers, the entire
community invites divine punishment.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:6–9 Lot’s readiness to protect the two men from the mob
is admirable. In desperation he offers his two unmarried daughters as
substitutes—a shocking, cowardly, and inexcusable act, even if he intended this
only as a bluff, or expected the offer to be rejected. The reaction of the crowd
only confirms the truly evil nature of their intentions.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:9 While Lot addresses them as “brothers” (v. 7), the
crowd resents him as a foreigner who has become the judge.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:16 he lingered. Even Lot is slow to grasp the
seriousness of the situation.
LOT
Abraham’s nephew Lot traveled with him to the promised land of Canaan.
When the combined wealth of Abraham and Lot proved too much for one
place, Abraham generously offered his nephew first choice of the land. Lot
chose the fertile Jordan Valley, settling in Sodom. Later, Abraham rescued
Lot when he was taken captive by invaders. When the wicked city of Sodom
was destroyed, God allowed Lot’s family to escape. Lot’s wife disobeyed by
looking back, however, and was turned into a pillar of salt. Filled with fear,
Lot and his daughters hid in a cave. Both daughters, desperate to have
children, tricked Lot into fathering a son with them. Despite his
shortcomings, Lot is described in 2 Pet. 2:7–10 as a righteous man. (Genesis
19:15–16)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:17–23 Since the entire valley will be destroyed, Lot is
told to escape to the hills. Lot thinks this will be too difficult and therefore
asks to be given refuge in a small city in the valley. The Lord grants this
request, further showing his mercy to Lot amid the judgment on Sodom.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:24–25 the LORD rained on Sodom and Gomorrah
sulfur and fire from the LORD out of heaven. This judgment on Sodom and
Gomorrah, the flood of chs. 6–9, and the later destruction of the Canaanites
(Deut. 20:16–18) all demonstrate God’s righteous wrath against sin, his mercy
in rescuing the godly from destruction, and the certainty of the final judgment
to come.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:26 The pillar of salt may have been composed of the
fiery matter raining in molten lumps from the sky.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:27–29 The text now focuses briefly on Abraham,
reminding the reader of his intercession for Lot and his family (18:20–33).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 19:31–38 Lot’s daughters had intercourse with him on
consecutive nights, but he was unaware of it. This unseemly episode marked
the origin of the Moabites and Ammonites.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:1–18 King Abimelech takes Sarah into his harem, which
seems to put at risk God’s promise that Sarah will bear Abraham a son.
FACT
What is the Negeb? The Negeb (20:1) is a dry area of rolling hills in
southern Israel. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob lived there. Hagar sought refuge
in the Negeb. Later, it provided refuge for Israelites fleeing from invading
armies.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:1 No specific reason is given for Abraham’s relocation to
Gerar, in the northern Negeb. Abraham and Sarah are unknown to the inhabi-
tants of the region.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:2 She is my sister. This comment assumes that the
reader is familiar with 12:11–13, which explains the rationale behind
Abraham’s words. Abimelech king of Gerar. Abimelech, which means “my
father is king,” appears to have been a common royal name (compare 26:1–2).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:3–6 But God came to Abimelech. The text emphasizes
that Sarah has not had intercourse with the king; otherwise, it could have
appeared that Abimelech was the father of Isaac (21:1–3). in a dream by
night. Throughout Genesis dreams often bring divine revelation (compare
28:12; 31:10–11; 37:5–9; 40:5–8; 41:1).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:7 Abraham is the first person in the Bible called a
prophet. This context emphasizes his ability to intercede for others, one of the
characteristics of a true prophet (Jer. 15:1); compare his actions in Gen. 18:22–
33.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:9 Abimelech rightly criticizes Abraham for deceiving
him about Sarah. The term great sin sometimes implies adultery.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:11 There is no fear of God at all in this place.
Abraham’s response betrays both his lack of faith in God and his misjudgment
of the people of Gerar. The story shows clearly that the king and his servants
were God-fearing (see vv. 5, 8, 16).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:12–13 Besides, she is indeed my sister. Abraham’s
half-truth does not excuse his behavior. at every place to which we come.
Abraham regularly resorted to this wife-sister ruse for his own self-protection.
Yet only God’s intervention protects Abraham’s relationship with Sarah.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:14–16 Abimelech’s generosity and innocence contrast
sharply with Abraham’s deception. The king’s actions publicly affirm that he
has not acted inappropriately toward Sarah.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 20:17–18 God has power over fertility. By praying,
Abraham demonstrates that God’s blessing is being mediated through him (see
12:3).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:1–21 In fulfillment of God’s promise, Sarah bears
Abraham a son, who is named Isaac. While Isaac takes priority over Ishmael,
God does not abandon Hagar and her son.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:1–2 as he had promised. See 17:16, 19, 21. at the time
of which God had spoken to him. See 18:10, 14.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:3 Isaac. God had announced the name to Abraham in
17:19 (see note).
ISAAC
God had promised Abraham that the world would be blessed through his
descendants. When Isaac was born to Abraham and Sarah, it was the initial
fulfillment of that promise. At God’s command, Isaac was almost sacrificed
by his father, but his life was spared when God provided a ram to be
sacrificed in his place. This prefigured the sacrifice of God’s own Son in the
place of all who would believe in him. Isaac settled in Gerar, a Philistine
city, where he became prosperous. He married Rebekah, who bore him twin
sons, Jacob and Esau. Although Esau was his favorite son, Isaac was tricked
by Jacob into giving him the blessing intended for his older brother.
(Genesis 21:1–3)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:4 Isaac is circumcised by Abraham, fulfilling God’s
instructions in 17:12.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:8 Isaac was probably two or three years old when he was
weaned.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:9 The Hebrew verb translated laughing can mean either
“mocking” or “playing.” Here, it probably means “mocking.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:12 through Isaac shall your offspring be named. Even
though Ishmael is older than Isaac, God confirms that Isaac will take priority
over Ishmael (see 17:19). The importance of this is explained in Rom. 9:7 and
Heb. 11:18.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:14 putting it on her shoulder, along with the child.
While these words might suggest that Ishmael was placed on Hagar’s shoulder,
this is hardly likely, since Ishmael is about 16 years old (see 16:16; 21:5, 8).
Abraham gave Ishmael to Hagar, probably after putting the bread and water on
Hagar’s shoulder. The Hebrew term for “child” may mean an older teenager.
wilderness of Beersheba. Water was difficult to find in this region. Man-made
wells appear to have been the main source (see 21:30; 26:18–22).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:17–18 God’s intervention saves Hagar and confirms to
her that her son will become a great nation, echoing the promise given to
Abraham in v. 13. God heard . . . the boy (v. 17). “Ishmael” means “God
hears” (see 16:11).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:21 wilderness of Paran. The central region in northern
Sinai.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:22–23 God is with you in all that you do. Abimelech
attributes Abraham’s success to God.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:25–30 Before sealing the treaty, Abraham raises the
controversial issue of ownership of a well. The covenant or treaty was
designed to prevent conflict between the two parties. The gift of seven ewe
lambs to Abimelech confirms Abraham’s ownership of the well.
FACT
Why fight over a well? Wells are of great importance in the hot, dry climates
around the world. Because lack of water was a constant threat, both military
generals and civilian travelers would often plan their routes according to the
location of wells. (See 21:25–31.)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:31 In light of Abraham’s gift to Abimelech, the name
Beersheba probably means “well of seven.” It could also mean “well of the
oath,” since the Hebrew words for “seven” and “oath” are similar. Perhaps the
name was chosen because it embraced both concepts. When a permanent
settlement was established in this area, it was named after the well (see 26:33).
The town of Beersheba, in the northern Negeb, marked the southern boundary
of Israel (e.g., Judg. 20:1).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:32 land of the Philistines. The term “Philistines” is
normally associated with non-Canaanites from the Aegean region who
inhabited southwest Canaan from about 1180 B.C. onward—nearly a thousand
years after Abraham’s time. In light of this, the term may have been used here
and elsewhere to replace an earlier, obscure term; Genesis contains various
examples of such modernizations.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 21:33 Everlasting God. Here the common Semitic term for
“God” is followed by the attribute of everlastingness.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:1–19 The conditional promises of 12:1–3 are now
unconditionally guaranteed as a result of Abraham’s preparedness to sacrifice
his son. Put to the test, Abraham displays remarkable trust in God. James 2:21–
22 says that Abraham’s actions here “completed” the faith he had already
expressed (see Gen. 15:6).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:1 God tested Abraham. While it is not unknown for
God to test individuals, testing must be clearly distinguished from tempting.
God does not tempt anyone to do evil (James 1:13). He does, however, test
people’s commitment to him (e.g., Ex. 15:25; 16:4).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:2 your only son Isaac, whom you love. With Ishmael’s
departure from Abraham’s household, Isaac had become Abraham’s cherished
only son. land of Moriah. According to 2 Chron. 3:1, Solomon constructed the
temple on Mount Moriah in Jerusalem. While Genesis 22 does not specify that
the sacrifice of Isaac took place at or near Jerusalem, v. 14 may imply such a
connection. A burnt offering involved the entire sacrifice being consumed by
fire.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:3 Abraham rose early in the morning. Abraham
promptly responds to the challenge placed before him.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:4 On the third day. It requires about two days to travel
on foot from Beersheba to Jerusalem, a distance of about 45 miles (72 km).
Elsewhere, two days represents the time set aside to prepare for a special
encounter with God on the third day (see Ex. 19:11).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:5–8 I and the boy will . . . come again to you. While
Abraham is committed to sacrificing Isaac, he believes that both of them will
return (see Heb. 11:17–19). God will provide . . . the lamb. It is unclear
whether Abraham is speaking ironically here (Isaac is the “lamb”), or whether
he is expressing faith that somehow God will preserve his son.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:11 the angel of the LORD. See note on 16:7. The
repetition of the name Abraham, Abraham underscores the urgency of the
intervention (compare 22:1).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:12 now I know that you fear God. While Abraham’s
faith was the means by which God counted him as righteous (15:6), that faith is
now “active along with his works” and is “completed by his works” (James
2:21–23). His faith resulted in obedience.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:13 God provides a ram to be sacrificed as a burnt
offering. In Genesis such sacrifices are associated with solemn promises made
by God (see 8:20–22). instead of his son. The fact that a ram died in the place
of Isaac suggests the principle of substitutionary atonement, especially the
substitutionary death of Christ on the cross, as “the Lamb of God, who takes
away the sin of the world” (John 1:29).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:14 The LORD will provide. The belief developed (as it
is said to this day) that God would provide the sacrifice necessary to atone for
sin. The mount of the LORD probably refers to the hill on which the temple
was later built in Jerusalem.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:15–18 By myself I have sworn. The oath concentrates
on a single descendant of Abraham who will overcome his enemies and bring
blessing to all the nations of the earth (v. 18). This oath to Abraham comes to
fulfillment in Jesus Christ (Acts 3:25–26; Gal. 3:16).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:16–17 because you . . . have not withheld your son,
your only son. Abraham’s actions prove his faith (see Rom. 4:3, 22–23; Gal.
3:6).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 22:24 concubine. See note on 25:5–6.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:1–20 Upon the death of Sarah, Abraham buys a cave in
Hebron as a burial place. By acquiring this land, Abraham confirms that his
descendants are to be associated with the land of Canaan, as God had already
promised (12:7; 13:14–17; 15:18–21).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:2 Kiriath-arba means “town of four” (see Josh. 14:15).
It was later known as Hebron (see Judg. 1:10).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:4 a sojourner and foreigner among you. Despite God’s
repeated promises that Abraham’s descendants will possess all the land of
Canaan, after 62 years in the land Abraham has no permanent location to call
his own. The NT explains that Abraham chose to go on living in tents because
he was looking for a city “whose designer and builder is God” (Heb. 11:9–10).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:6 The Hittites recognize Abraham’s special relationship
with God and give him the title prince of God.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:10 Although Ephron is present, Abraham seeks
permission from the Hittite population as a whole—either because Abraham
himself was not a Hittite or because the transfer of property required the
involvement of a third party.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:11–16 Although Ephron first offers the field and cave to
Abraham for free, this may not have been his true intention. The second time
he offers it, he casually mentions what he would consider a fair price (v. 15). It
is important that Abraham buy the property because that ensures that he has
full legal title to the burial plot. Comparisons with 1 Kings 16:24 and Jer. 32:9
suggest that four hundred shekels of silver was a high price, although this
cannot be known for sure, since the weight of a shekel could vary according to
the weights current among the merchants.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:17–19 Mamre. See note on 13:18.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 23:20 Abraham’s purchase of the field and cave meant that
his descendants would always own this land. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Rebekah,
and Leah would later be buried in this cave.
FACT
Two biblical firsts. The burial of Sarah (23:19) is the first biblical record of a
burial. Abraham’s purchase of the burial plot is also the first biblical record
of a business transaction.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:1–67 Abraham sends one of his servants to his homeland
in Mesopotamia to find a wife for Isaac. The journey was about 550 miles (900
km) and would have taken the servant about 21 days.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:2–6 Abraham did not want Isaac to marry a Canaanite,
fearing this would draw him away from the Lord. From ch. 9 onward, the
Canaanites are frequently portrayed as wicked. put your hand under my
thigh. See note on 24:9. In spite of having left Haran in northern Mesopotamia
almost a hundred years earlier, Abraham refers to it as my country (v. 4). He
emphasizes, however, that Isaac should not return there (v. 6); Isaac’s future is
in Canaan.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:9 the servant put his hand under the thigh of
Abraham. Since striking one’s thigh was possibly understood as a sign of
remorse and submission (see Jer. 31:19; Ezek. 21:12), the placing of one’s
hand under the thigh of another may have indicated submission to that person’s
strength and authority.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:10 camels. See note on 12:16. Mesopotamia (literally,
“between the rivers”) was the Greek title for the region between the Euphrates
and Tigris Rivers. Here it refers to only northwestern Mesopotamia. The city
of Nahor, probably identified with Nakhur, was near Haran (see note on
11:31).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:12–14 The servant (like Abraham) has faith in the Lord
and prays for guidance. The conditions he has set reveal that he seeks a wife
who is generous and caring. The specific request in v. 14 is not the ordinary
way to ask for guidance. Nevertheless, God graciously honors the request
(compare Judg. 6:36–40).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:16 The description of Rebekah as a maiden whom no
man had known confirms that she is a virgin, creating the expectation that she
may well be the one God intends to be Isaac’s wife.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:27–28 God’s swift answer to the servant’s prayer
prompts worship and praise.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:50–51 Rebekah’s brother and father acknowledge the
providential nature of these events. God clearly intends that Rebekah should
become Isaac’s wife.
FACT
Family ties. Laban took responsibility for his sister Rebekah (24:29-51).
Apparently their father, who was still alive, was unable to do so.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:53 The gifts confirm what the servant has earlier said
about Abraham’s wealth (see v. 35).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:63 Isaac went out. This is another divinely directed
event, allowing Isaac to be the first to meet Rebekah when they arrive.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 24:65 she took her veil and covered herself. It was
customary for a woman to cover her face with a veil during the period of
betrothal, when she was committed to be married.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:1–4 Abraham took another wife. Like Hagar, Keturah
has the status of a “concubine” (see 1 Chron. 1:32; also note on Gen. 25:5–6).
This relationship possibly existed before Sarah’s death. In the ancient Near
East, wealthy men sometimes had “second” wives.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:5–6 These verses highlight Isaac’s position as
Abraham’s main heir. “Concubines” probably refers to Hagar and Keturah,
both of whom bore Abraham children. Neither woman shared the status of
Sarah, Abraham’s first wife (see also 1 Chron. 1:28–34).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:9–10 the cave of Machpelah . . . that Abraham
purchased. See ch. 23.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:12–18 This short section names Ishmael’s 12 sons, who
became heads of tribes in Arabia, fulfilling God’s promise in 17:20.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:12 These are the generations of. See note on 2:4.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:19–37:1 Isaac’ s Descendants. The familiar phrase
“these are the generations of” introduces the next main section of Genesis (see
note on 2:4). While these chapters focus on the family of Isaac, special
attention is given to Jacob because the unique family line of Genesis will be
continued through him (see diagram).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:20 The repeated use of the term Aramean and the
designation of their dwelling place as Paddan-aram (“plain of Aram”)
indicate that Abraham’s family was considered to be Aramean.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:21 Like Sarah, Rebekah is also barren.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:22–23 The observation that the children struggled
together within her introduces one of the main themes of chs. 25–36. The
relationship between the twin boys will often be hostile. The divine revelation
that the older shall serve the younger indicates that Jacob will have a
significant role in the family line.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:26 holding Esau’s heel, so his name was called Jacob.
The name “Jacob” resembles the Hebrew term for “heel” and has the
connotation of “deceiver.” To grasp someone by the heel was apparently a
figure of speech meaning “to deceive.” The idea of deception will be a
repeated theme in the life of Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old. The twins are
born 15 years before the death of Abraham, which is recorded in vv. 7–8.
Occasionally in Genesis, events are narrated out of chronological order, as
here.
REBEKAH
Because he did not want Isaac to marry a Canaanite, Abraham sent his
servant to Mesopotamia to find a wife for his son. The servant prayed for a
sign to help him recognize the woman God had appointed for this purpose.
Rebekah’s actions were the precise answer to the servant’s prayer. She was
beautiful and hospitable, and in an act of faith she left her country and her
family so that she could journey to Canaan and marry Isaac. Like Sarah,
Rebekah was barren. Isaac prayed on her behalf, and God heard his prayer.
Rebekah gave birth to Jacob and Esau. Favoring Jacob above his brother,
Rebekah instructed him to trick his father into giving him the blessing
intended for Esau. (Genesis 25:23)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:27–34 These verses tell of Esau selling his birthright to
Jacob. While Jacob may be criticized for exploiting his brother in a moment of
weakness, Esau is indifferent toward his firstborn status. That is why Heb.
12:16 describes Esau as “unholy.” He did not appreciate that his birthright was
linked to God’s plan of redemption.
FACT
Tents were temporary shelters made of cloth and were often woven from
black goat’s hair. The tent was held up by ropes and poles. Most tents were
rectangular in shape. Because nomadic families moved often, they had little
furniture. Tents still provide housing for nomadic peoples living in the
Middle East today.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 25:30 In Hebrew, the name Edom is similar to the word
red.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:1–35 The events in this chapter are difficult to date
precisely but they probably took place after the death of Abraham (25:8), when
Esau and Jacob were young men.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:1–2 besides the former famine that was in the days of
Abraham. See 12:10. On that occasion, Abraham went down to Egypt. Isaac,
however, is instructed to remain in Gerar. Abimelech. See note on 20:2. It is
possible that this is the king mentioned in chs. 20–21. Perhaps more likely, he
is his son or grandson. Philistines. See note on 21:32.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:3–5 I will establish the oath that I swore to Abraham.
This refers to the oath in 22:16–18, the substance of which is repeated here
(see note on 22:15–18). Isaac is the heir to the promises God made to
Abraham.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:6–7 She is my sister. Isaac makes the same dishonest
claim that Abraham earlier used in both Egypt (12:10–12) and Gerar (20:1–
18).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:8 saw Isaac laughing with Rebekah. The Hebrew verb
implies they were laughing while caressing affectionately.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:15 The Philistines may have closed up the wells to
discourage herdsmen from grazing their livestock in this region.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:17 Isaac relocates from the city of Gerar to the Valley of
Gerar, a region under the control of Gerar but not next to it.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:19–22 Since water was vital in this arid region, disputes
over the ownership of wells were common (see 21:25). The names of the wells
reflect the events associated with them.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:23–25 Isaac’s servants dug a well. Years earlier
Abraham dug a well at Beersheba (see 21:30), but the Philistines later filled it
in (26:15).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:26–31 Abimelech comes to Isaac to establish a
covenant (v. 28) or treaty with him, guaranteeing they will live together
peacefully (compare 21:22–32). Phicol is possibly the same individual as in
21:22. Alternatively, “Phicol” could be a family name or a title.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:32–33 This treaty coincides with the discovery of water
in a well being dug by Isaac’s servants. Therefore the well is called Shibah,
which resembles the Hebrew word for “oath.” Beersheba. See note on 21:31.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 26:34–35 The emphasis on the Hittite origin of Esau’s
wives probably implies that Esau has not chosen them wisely. This is
confirmed as they made life bitter for Isaac and Rebekah (v. 35).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:1–2 Isaac decides it is time to bless his firstborn son,
Esau. Such blessings were seen as shaping the future of those blessed.
FACT
A father’s blessing (ch. 27) was not just a symbolic gesture. It established
the identity of the heir, granting him all the privileges of that position. The
father’s blessing was even seen as in some way shaping his future.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:4 that my soul may bless you before I die. Isaac
intends that his blessing for Esau will establish the identity of the heir to the
promises God had given to Abraham and Isaac.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:5–10 Rebekah was listening. Rebekah plans Jacob’s
deception, but Jacob is still responsible for the part he plays in this trick.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:11 From birth, Esau was clearly distinguished from
Jacob by his hairy appearance (see 25:25).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:29 Let peoples serve you, and nations bow down to
you. Isaac’s blessing for his “firstborn” goes far beyond material prosperity (v.
28). Isaac asks for universal sovereignty over peoples and nations, building on
God’s promise to Abraham that kings will be among his descendants (17:6).
Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be everyone who blesses
you! These words echo God’s promise to Abraham, in 12:3, that he will be a
blessing to all nations.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:30–36 Is he not rightly named Jacob? For he has
cheated me these two times (v. 36). Esau refers here to the name “Jacob,”
which means “to deceive/cheat” (see note on 25:26). Esau believes that Jacob
has cheated him out of both his birthright (see 25:29–34) and his blessing,
although Esau willingly forfeited his birthright to Jacob (see 25:33).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:40 you shall break his yoke from your neck. Although
Jacob has been given authority over his older twin brother, Esau will
eventually free himself from his brother’s control. Later, Esau’s descendants
will settle outside the Promised Land, to the east of the Jordan River (see note
on 32:3–5). They will eventually control Seir, which is later named “Edom.”
ESAU
Esau, whose name means “hairy,” was the son of Isaac and Rebekah and the
elder twin brother of Jacob. Esau was a skillful hunter and his father’s
favorite son, but he brought misery upon his parents by marrying two Hittite
women. Esau carelessly sold his birthright to Jacob for a bowl of stew. Jacob
then tricked Isaac into giving him the blessing intended for his brother. In
response, Esau tried to kill Jacob. Years later, however, Jacob and Esau were
reconciled. Esau founded the nation of Edom, which became an enemy of
Israel. Jacob the chosen one and Esau the one not chosen typify the age-long
struggle between the people of God and their adversaries. (Genesis 27:36)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:41–45 I will kill my brother Jacob (v. 41). When
Rebekah learns of Esau’s desire to murder Jacob, she encourages Jacob to go
to her brother Laban in northwestern Mesopotamia (Haran).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 27:46 the Hittite women. Rebekah is probably referring to
Esau’s wives (see 26:34–35), although she could mean Hittite women in
general. She may have raised this issue with Isaac as a reason for sending
Jacob away.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:1–2 Abraham issued similar instructions in 24:3–4.
Canaanite women is a broader designation that would have included the
Hittites (see note on 10:6–20).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:3–4 Isaac anticipates that Jacob will return to Canaan to
take possession of the land divinely given to Abraham. make you fruitful and
multiply you. See note on 1:28. A company of peoples echoes the idea of
Abraham as the father of many nations (see 17:4–6). It is repeated in 35:11.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:6–9 Esau seeks to make amends for having taken
Canaanite wives by marrying one of Ishmael’s daughters. However, he still
retains his two Canaanite wives.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:10–22 The Lord uses an extraordinary dream to confirm
that the divine promises to Abraham will be fulfilled through Jacob. A similar
event will take place upon Jacob’s return to Canaan (32:22–32).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:10 Jacob sets out to travel the 550 miles (900 km) to
Haran (see note on 11:31).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:12 ladder set up on the earth. What matters most is not
the exact shape of this structure but its purpose. It provides a bridge between
heaven and earth, showing that God is still committed to making the earth his
dwelling place. Jesus identifies himself as the ladder linking earth and heaven
(John 1:51). While human beings want to ascend to heaven (as reflected in the
Tower of Babel story, Genesis 11), God is interested in making the earth his
temple-city.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:13–15 The LORD stood above it (v. 13) could also be
translated “the LORD stood beside him” (esv footnote). The Lord’s words
loudly echo his promises to Abraham (12:3, 7; 13:14–16; 17:7–8; 18:18;
22:17–18) and Isaac (26:4).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:16–17 Believing that the LORD is in this place, Jacob
describes it as the house of God. The presence of God on earth is clearly
central in Jacob’s thinking.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:18 Jacob marks this special event at Bethel (see v. 19)
by setting up a pillar and consecrating it with oil, but he does not build an
altar. This indicates that he has not yet fully accepted the Lord as his God.
While setting up pillars was common in Canaanite worship, Deut. 16:22
prohibits it. Years later, after his faith-transforming encounter with God at
Penuel (Gen. 32:22–32), Jacob returns to Bethel to construct an altar (35:1–7).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:19 the name of the city was Luz at the first. The city’s
name continued to be “Luz” until the Israelites occupied Canaan many
centuries later (see 35:6; 48:3; Judg. 1:23). The actual location called “Bethel”
by Jacob probably lay outside the city of Luz (see Josh. 16:2).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:20–21 If God will be with me . . . , then the LORD
shall be my God. The conditional nature of Jacob’s vow reveals that he is still
not fully committed to the Lord (see note on v. 18).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 28:22 I will give a full tenth to you. Centuries later,
Israelite worshipers give a tenth of their income (a “tithe”) to God as an
expression of their commitment to him.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:1–14 There are similarities between this passage and the
earlier journey of Abraham’s servant to Paddan-aram to find a wife for Isaac
(ch. 24). While both accounts involve providential encounters at a well,
Abraham’s servant prayed for guidance, but the text says nothing about Jacob
praying.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:1 The people of the east is an unusual way of referring
to the inhabitants of Paddan-aram in northwest Mesopotamia. In Genesis, the
“east” is often associated with those who are expelled or move away from
God’s presence (3:23–24; 4:16; 21:14; 25:6). This brief description may
indicate that Jacob’s relatives do not worship the Lord.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:4–6 When Jacob discovers that the shepherds are from
Haran, he asks about his uncle, Laban the son of Nahor. Strictly speaking,
Laban is Nahor’s grandson. The Hebrew term for “son” may indicate any male
descendant.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:6 Providentially, Laban’s daughter Rachel is bringing
her herd to the well. Rachel means “ewe,” an appropriate name for a
shepherdess (v. 9).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:10 Jacob came near and rolled the stone from the
well’s mouth. Jacob demonstrates great strength in being able to move the
stone.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:11 Jacob kissed Rachel, probably showing family
affection rather than feelings of romance (compare v. 13).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:18 I will serve you seven years for your younger
daughter Rachel. In the ancient Near East it was customary for a prospective
husband to give the bride’s father a substantial gift of money, known as the
bride-price. Jacob offers to work for Laban to give the equivalent of seven
years’ wages for Rachel.
RACHEL
Rachel was the daughter of Laban, uncle of Jacob. She became Jacob’s wife.
Since she was a shepherdess, it is fitting that Rachel’s name means “ewe.”
Rachel was a beautiful woman, and the Bible says that Jacob loved her
immediately. So deep was his love for her that after being deceived into
marrying her older sister Leah, Jacob promised to work an additional seven
years for Laban so that he could marry Rachel as well. There was constant
strife between the sisters because Jacob favored Rachel, and because Rachel
was envious of Leah’s ability to have children. After many years of waiting,
however, Rachel gave birth to Joseph and Benjamin. Ruth 4:11 says that
Rachel and Leah “together built up the house of Israel.” (Genesis 29:18, 20)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:22 made a feast. Feasting was an important element of
ancient Near Eastern weddings.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:23 in the evening. It was dark or nearly dark when Leah
was introduced to Jacob for the consummation of their marriage. In a world
without artificial lighting, darkness can be pitch-black. Jacob did not realize
that Leah was the bride. She may also have come to him wearing a veil, the
sign of a betrothed woman (see 24:65).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:25 Only in the morning does Jacob realize he has been
deceived.
FACT
Giving servants as gifts to the bride (29:24) was very common in OT times.
Doing so provided the newly married woman the help she would need in
running a household. Having servants also gave the wife a position of status
within her community.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:26 to give the younger before the firstborn. Laban’s
remarks are highly ironic in light of Jacob’s earlier deception of his father.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:27 Complete the week of this one. The wedding
celebrations lasted for seven days. Laban persuades Jacob to complete this
process with Leah, with the understanding that that he will then be able to
marry Rachel. This would also give opportunity for Leah to conceive a child.
Jacob will have to work for another seven years to pay the bride-price for
Rachel.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:31 When the LORD saw that Leah was hated. From
the beginning, Jacob had loved Rachel (v. 18). He probably found it difficult
to love Leah, given the events that had brought them together. Rachel probably
loathed her sister for the same reason. Yet their treatment of Leah causes the
Lord to favor her with children, while Rachel is barren. As Genesis frequently
shows, the Lord is ultimately the One who creates human life.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 29:32–35 Leah bears Jacob four sons. As the esv footnotes
reveal, each son’s name is a wordplay on Leah’s comment after his birth.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:3–8 Because of her barrenness, Rachel offers Jacob her
servant Bilhah as a substitute wife (v. 3). This was a common practice in
ancient Near Eastern culture. Abraham and Sarah had also followed this
custom (see 16:1–4). Children born to the second wife were regarded as
belonging to the first wife, preserving the family line. Therefore, Rachel names
the two boys born to Bilhah (30:6, 8).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:14–16 Leah buys from Rachel the right to lie with
Jacob. Having agreed to this with her sister, she says to Jacob, I have hired
you with my son’s mandrakes. The context suggests Rachel may have
viewed the plant as increasing fertility.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:17–21 Once more (see note on 29:32–35), the names of
the sons reflect events surrounding their births.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:22–24 God remembered Rachel. On God’s
“remembering,” see note on 8:1. God has taken away my reproach. A
woman’s inability to bear children could be interpreted as divine disapproval.
Joseph’s name is derived from a remark made by his mother; in Hebrew
Joseph sounds like the verb “add to.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:25–31:18 Having completed 14 years of service to
Laban, Jacob wants to return to his family in Canaan. Laban, however, is
reluctant to lose Jacob’s service, which has brought him considerable wealth.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:27–30 Laban’s use of divination is sinful (see Deut.
18:10), even though the information obtained is accurate. the LORD has
blessed me because of you. All the members of the special line descended
from Abraham are portrayed as bringing God’s blessing to others. Name your
wages. For 14 years Jacob has served Laban to pay the bride-price for Leah
and Rachel. Having fulfilled this obligation, which has brought great financial
benefit to Laban, Jacob now wants to provide for his own household.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:31–34 As payment for his services, Jacob asks Laban to
give him livestock with distinctive markings. Then it would be obvious which
animals were Jacob’s and which were Laban’s.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:35 Having agreed on the wages, Laban secretly removes
all the animals he had promised to Jacob and gives them to his sons.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:37–39 To produce more speckled and spotted sheep and
goats, Jacob manipulates the breeding process. Scholars differ as to how Jacob
is using sticks with peeled white streaks in them to do this.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:41–42 Jacob ensures that the striped, speckled, and
spotted sheep and goats come from the best animals in Laban’s flocks.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 30:43 Having arrived in Paddan-aram with only his staff
(see 32:10), Jacob has become very rich. His possessions resemble earlier
summaries of Abraham’s wealth (see 12:16; 24:35).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:4–13 But the God of my father has been with me (v.
5). While Laban has taken advantage of Jacob, God has consistently worked
against Laban’s schemes. God of Bethel (v. 13). At Bethel, God had promised
to be with Jacob (28:15). Some 20 years later, Jacob acknowledges God’s
faithfulness.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:14–16 In their response, Rachel and Leah also contrast
their father’s actions with God’s (see note on vv. 4–13). While Laban has tried
to take what is theirs (vv. 14–15), God has provided for them and their children
(v. 16).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:19–55 Fearful that Laban will prevent him from leaving
Paddan-aram, Jacob escapes when his father-in-law is away shearing sheep.
When Laban discovers what has happened, he pursues Jacob, catching up with
him in Gilead. They eventually make a treaty that guarantees protection to both
parties.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:19 Rachel stole her father’s household gods. Little is
known about the nature of these objects. The term is often translated as
“images/idols.” They may have been small figurines depicting particular gods.
The narrator does not explain why Rachel took them.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:20 Jacob tricked Laban. Although Jacob takes only
what rightly belongs to him, Laban later accuses him of having stolen
everything that is now in Jacob’s possession (v. 43).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:21 hill country of Gilead. The region lies east of the
Jordan River, several hundred miles south of Paddan-aram.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:22–24 Laban catches up with Jacob about 10 days after
his initial departure. Jacob, with his family and livestock, has reached Gilead.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:26–30 the God of your father. Although Laban
acknowledges that God has spoken to him (see v. 24), he refuses to
acknowledge God as his own; he is the God of Isaac. To underline this point,
Laban asks Jacob, why did you steal my gods?
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:26 Rachel and Leah had willingly agreed to go with
Jacob (v. 16), despite what Laban says.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:35 Rachel tries to prevent Laban from finding his
household gods by telling him that the way of women is upon her (that is, she
is menstruating).
FACT
Why was Laban so upset when his household gods were stolen? Household
gods (31:30) had a more practical use than just idol worship. They served as
titles of ownership to one’s property and inheritance.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:42 the God of Abraham and the Fear of Isaac. The
term “Fear” is clearly a substitute for “God.” Possibly, since Isaac treated God
with reverential fear, God could be called the “One Feared” or the “Fear” of
Isaac. Another possibility is the idea that Isaac’s God caused fear in others
(see, e.g., the reaction of Abimelech in 26:10–11, 28–29).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:43–44 In spite of Jacob’s observations, Laban claims
ownership of everything that Jacob has taken. Then, possibly to save face,
Laban invites Jacob to make a covenant or treaty with him on the pretext of
protecting his daughters and grandchildren (see v. 50).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:45–46 The creation of two “witnesses” may have been
intended to emphasize the seriousness of the oath. More likely, the two
witnesses reflect in some way the deities Jacob and Laban worship. Jacob’s
single stone (monotheism) contrasts with the heap of stones set up by Laban
and his relatives (polytheism).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 31:47–49 Mizpah, meaning “watchtower,” became the
name of a settlement north of the Jabbok River. It was the hometown of
Jephthah (Judg. 11:11). Mizpah was also the name of an important city on the
boundary between Israel and Judah, 8 miles (13 km) northwest of Jerusalem
(Judges 20).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:1–21 After separating peacefully from Laban, Jacob
prepares to meet his estranged brother Esau. Jacob is naturally hesitant about
how he will be received some 20 years after fleeing from Esau in order to
avoid being killed by him. Jacob’s preparations are intended to promote a
peaceful reconciliation.
Jacob Returns to Canaan
c. 1976 B.C.
After acquiring wealth in Paddan-aram, Jacob returned to Canaan. He came to Mahanaim, where he
sent his household ahead of him and crossed the Jabbok alone. There he wrestled with a mysterious man
until morning and named the place Peniel (also called Penuel). Jacob then encountered his brother Esau,
who had come from Edom to meet him. After the two were reconciled, Esau returned to Edom, while
Jacob journeyed to Canaan.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:1–2 The reference to the angels of God brings to mind
Jacob’s dream at Bethel (28:12), the only other place in the OT where this
expression is used. This is God’s camp is also an unusual phrase. Since camps
were mobile, unlike houses, Jacob’s remark suggests that God has sent his
angels to accompany Jacob safely back to the land of Canaan. Mahanaim
means “two camps,” possibly referring to God’s camp and Jacob’s camp.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:3–5 Jacob sent messengers before him. The Hebrew
term for “messengers” implies “angels” in v. 1. The land of Seir, the country
of Edom lies east of Canaan in Transjordan. Esau was living in this area before
Jacob returned. He may have already separated himself from his father Isaac,
who is living at Mamre, near Hebron (see 35:27). “Seir” means “hairy” in
Hebrew, and “Edom” is similar to the word for “red” (see 25:25).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:6 four hundred men with him. A force of this size
suggests that Esau plans to attack Jacob.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:7–8 two camps. Jacob’s actions, while understandable,
show that he is still unable to trust God fully for protection.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:9–13 Jacob prays, because of his fear of Esau. Because
God has prospered him so greatly, Jacob is able to divide everything that he
has into two camps. O LORD. This is the first time Jacob addresses God using
his special name, “Yahweh” (see note on 2:4). make your offspring as the
sand of the sea. Genesis does not specify when this divine promise was made
to Jacob, as it was to Abraham (see 22:17).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:18 your servant Jacob . . . my lord Esau. Jacob’s
humility is noteworthy, in light of the earlier statements about the older serving
the younger (see 25:23) and about Jacob being lord over his brothers (27:29).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:22–32 This passage records a nighttime encounter
between God and Jacob. Jacob is transformed by this extraordinary meeting,
and his name is changed from “Jacob” to “Israel.”
FACT
The Jabbok River. The Hebrew word for “wrestle” is abbaq. This has led
many scholars to believe that the Jabbok River (32:22) was named after
Jacob’s famous wrestling match with God.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:22–23 ford of the Jabbok. The Jabbok River flows
westward into the Jordan Valley about 24 miles (39 km) north of the Dead Sea.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:24 a man wrestled. By the time their contest ends,
Jacob is convinced that his opponent is God himself (see v. 30). This is
possible, since God had previously come to Abraham in human form (18:1–
15).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:25 Jacob’s hip was put out of joint. Jacob’s injury
shows the strength of his opponent and his own desire to win the fight.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:26 I will not let you go unless you bless me. Jacob is
so determined to be blessed that he will not release his opponent, even when
his thigh is dislocated.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:28 Your name shall no longer be called Jacob, but
Israel. “Israel” probably means “he strives with God.” It could also mean
“God strives” (see esv footnote). Jacob’s new name marks the end of a lifetime
of struggling with others (see 25:22). Jacob has finally come to realize the
importance of being blessed by God. The God of his father has now become
his God (32:9). See Hos. 12:3–4.
JACOB
Jacob was the son of Isaac and Rebekah. His name means “he grasps the
heel” or “he cheats.” Jacob used deception to receive the blessing intended
for his brother Esau. He then fled to the home of his uncle Laban. When
Jacob asked permission to marry Laban’s daughter Rachel, Laban agreed but
then tricked him into marrying her older sister Leah instead. However, Jacob
was allowed to marry Rachel as well, and he eventually became the father of
12 sons and a daughter. As he was returning to Canaan, Jacob wrestled with
an angel of the Lord. During this struggle he was given a new name, Israel,
which means “struggles with God.” Jacob’s 12 sons became the 12 tribes of
Israel. (Genesis 32:27–28)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:30 Jacob called the name of the place Peniel. “Peniel”
means “face of God.” Jacob’s encounter with God fills him with awe. When
later Moses asks to see God’s glory, he is told, “You cannot see my face, for
man shall not see me and live” (Ex. 33:20). In light of this, either Jacob’s
encounter is a remarkable exception or face to face is a figure of speech for
closeness to God.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 32:31 Penuel is a variant spelling of “Peniel.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:1–20 Having met the Lord at Peniel, Jacob is reconciled
with Esau.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:1–3 With Esau in sight, Jacob arranges his wives and
children in order of importance, with priority being given to Rachel and
Joseph.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:3 Jacob slowly approaches Esau, bowing himself to the
ground seven times. Jacob’s actions are clearly intended to express his
submission to Esau, despite the earlier divine revelation that the older would
serve the younger (25:23).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:4 Esau ran to meet him. The unreserved manner in
which Esau greets and embraces Jacob reveals that he is not angry with him.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:8 All this company that I met refers to the groups of
animals that Jacob had sent ahead to Esau (see 32:13–21).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:10 For I have seen your face, which is like seeing the
face of God, and you have accepted me. Jacob draws a remarkable parallel
between his earlier encounter with God (32:30) and his meeting with Esau.
Like God, Esau shows unmerited favor to Jacob.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:11 Please accept my blessing. Jacob’s blessing is his
present of livestock. Previously, Jacob had taken Esau’s blessing as the
firstborn. While Jacob cannot restore this to Esau, he wants to give him another
blessing, which comes from God’s blessing of Jacob.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:12–14 While Esau wants his brother to return with him,
Jacob politely refuses, using the travel-weariness of his children and livestock
as an excuse. until I come to my lord in Seir. Apparently Jacob still does not
fully trust Esau. He has no intention of following him to Seir (see v. 17). From
where Esau and Jacob met, Seir was about 100 miles (161 km) to the south,
while Succoth, on the border of Canaan, was only 4 miles (6.4 km) to the west.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:17–18 Succoth is in the Jordan Valley near where the
Jabbok River joins the Jordan River. Shechem, about 20 miles (32 km) west of
Succoth, was the first place named in connection with Abraham’s arrival in
Canaan (see 12:6).
FACT
The name Succoth (33:17) means “booths.” A booth was a temporary
dwelling resembling a tent or a hut. Most of the people around Succoth were
nomads, and they probably lived in tents or booths.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:19 hundred pieces of money. The term translated as
“money” is used rarely in the OT (see Josh. 24:32; Job 42:11). The precise
value is uncertain.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 33:20 This is the first altar mentioned in connection with
Jacob, and it signals his commitment to worship the Lord. This is seen by the
name he gives the altar: El-Elohe-Israel means “God, the God of Israel.”
Jacob identifies the God worshiped at this altar as the One whom he had
encountered at Peniel and who had changed his name.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:1–31 Almost as soon as Jacob returns to Canaan, an
incident threatens the future security of his family. While the rape of Dinah by
Shechem is inexcusable, the retribution by Simeon and Levi far exceeds the
crime. Jacob is very conscious of how their actions have endangered his entire
household.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:1 Dinah became friends with the women of the land.
The only other occurrence of this expression in Genesis is in 27:46, when
Rebekah speaks against Jacob’s marrying “one of the women of the land.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:2–4 Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, was
clearly a person of some importance in Shechem. While Hamor’s son
Shechem is initially attracted to Dinah by lust, he now desires to hold on to her
as his wife.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:8–9 Although Hamor comes to speak to Jacob (v. 6),
Jacob appears to be pushed aside by his sons. They are the ones who speak
with Hamor and Shechem.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:11–12 In an attempt to win over Dinah’s family,
Shechem offers a generous bride price and gift. This was a normal part of
marriage arrangements in the ancient Near East.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:14–17 In ch. 17, circumcision is introduced as the sign
of God’s covenant with Abraham. Those who are circumcised acknowledge
Abraham as their father.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:21 These men are at peace with us. Hamor and
Shechem are completely fooled by Jacob’s sons.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 34:25 two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi.
Although all of Jacob’s sons were involved in the deception, only Simeon and
Levi are involved in slaughtering all the males. This explains why both
brothers are later passed over in favor of their younger brother Judah (49:5–7).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:1–29 Jacob moves by stages from Shechem to Bethel,
eventually coming to Hebron, where his father Isaac is still alive. Transformed
by the experiences of Bethel and Peniel, Jacob is now ready to assume his role
as the one through whom God’s promises to Abraham will be continued.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:1 Jacob had only set up a pillar at Bethel when God
appeared to him (28:18). By returning to Bethel and building an altar there,
Jacob acknowledges that God has been faithful to him (see 28:20–22).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:2–3 Jacob prepares his household for entering God’s
presence: Bethel is the “house of God.” They must rid themselves of foreign
gods, as emphasized in the first of the Ten Commandments (Ex. 20:3).
Rachel’s theft of her father’s household gods suggests that polytheistic beliefs
existed within Jacob’s household. These must be abandoned. Jacob’s
household must purify themselves (Gen. 35:2). This may explain Jacob’s final
instruction to change garments (v. 2; see Ex. 19:10).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:4 It is not clear whether the rings that were in their
ears were worn by the people or by the foreign gods. Some ancient Near
Eastern evidence indicates that idols could have earrings. Jacob probably
buried these cultic objects.
FACT
Terebinths are huge, spreading trees that grow to a height of 20–26 feet (6–8
m). They have reddish-green leaves and red berries that grow in clusters. A
perfumed, oily resin flows out of the bark when it is cut. Terebinths grow in
hot, dry places, and were thus a source of welcome shade to the people of
the Bible (35:4; Hos. 4:13).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:5 a terror from God. While the nature of this terror is
unknown, other passages in Genesis record how the fear of God is used to
protect the patriarchs (e.g., 20:8; 26:28–29). Jacob’s fears (34:30) are answered
by God’s protection, in spite of Simeon and Levi’s excessive revenge (34:25).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:6 Luz (that is, Bethel). See note on 28:19.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:8 Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, was mentioned in 24:59,
though not by name. Deborah’s presence with Jacob may suggest that Rebekah
had sent her to him in connection with her promise to bring Jacob back home
(27:45).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:9 blessed him. This not only confirms the blessing of
32:29 but also makes Jacob equal to Abraham and Isaac (see 24:1; 25:11).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:10 On the change of Jacob’s name to Israel, see note on
32:28.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:11–12 God’s second statement emphasizes that Jacob is
now heir to the divine promises given to Abraham and Isaac. kings shall come
from your own body. The promise of royal descendants is first given to
Abraham in 17:6. This theme will reappear in Joseph’s dreams (37:6–10),
showing that the ultimate fulfillment of the promise will come through Jacob’s
descendants. The land that I gave. The divine promise of the land is renewed
to include Jacob and his descendants.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:14–15 pillar. See note on 28:18. drink offering. This is
the only mention in Genesis of such an offering. Later references suggest that
wine was used (e.g., Num. 15:1–10).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:16–20 Rachel dies while giving birth. The name that
Rachel gives her newborn son, Ben-oni, is potentially ambiguous (see esv
footnote). Jacob changes the name to make its meaning certain. Benjamin
means “son of my right hand.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:18 her soul was departing. This is one place in the OT
where the Hebrew word translated “soul” refers to what gives life to the body.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:22–23 Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father’s
concubine. While Reuben’s action may have been prompted by lust, it
challenged Jacob’s position as head of the household. Jacob later denies
Reuben the inheritance due him as the firstborn (49:3–4).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:26 These were the sons of Jacob who were born to
him in Paddan-aram. Strictly speaking (see vv. 16–20), Benjamin was not
born in Paddan-aram, but this is a general summary statement.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:27 Mamre, or Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron). See
notes on 13:18; 23:2.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 35:28–29 In spite of hinting that he would soon die in 27:1–
2, Isaac has remained alive during Jacob’s 20 years of exile in Paddan-aram.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 36:1–8 These verses explain the summary description of
Esau that comes in v. 9. These events occurred during Esau’s time in Canaan,
when five sons and some daughters were born to him. Esau then relocated in
the hill country of Seir.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 36:1 These are the generations of. See note on 2:4. Esau
(that is, Edom). On the origin of the name “Edom,” see note on 25:30.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 36:12 concubine. See note on 25:5–6.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 36:20–30 This section lists five chiefs associated with the
Horites, the original inhabitants of Seir. Eventually, Esau’s descendants
assume control of Seir, renaming it “Edom.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:1 Whereas Esau’s descendants dwell in Seir (alongside
the Horites), Jacob settles in Canaan (like his father Isaac).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:2–50:26 Jacob’ s Descendants. The last main section of
Genesis further develops the theme of a royal line descended from Abraham.
As governor of Egypt, Joseph brings divine blessing to many people. Genesis,
however, looks forward to a time when the leadership of Israel will pass from
the tribe of Joseph’s son Ephraim to the tribe of Judah (see Ps. 78:67–68). This
story would have shown its first readers how they came to be in Egypt, namely,
through God’s mysterious use of both evil and noble deeds to bring about his
purpose (see Gen. 50:20).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:2–36 Joseph is the second youngest son of Jacob, but his
father gives him privileges normally given to the firstborn. Joseph’s dreams
further antagonize his older brothers, who cannot accept that he will someday
reign over them.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:2 These are the generations of. See note on 2:4.
Joseph brought a bad report of them. Joseph’s action brings him into
conflict with his brothers.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:3 the son of his old age. Since Benjamin, not Joseph,
was actually the last son born to Jacob, the unusual Hebrew expression “son of
old age” could mean either (1) someone who displays exceptional maturity
while still young or perhaps (2) the son closest to Jacob in his old age. robe of
many colors. The actual design of the cloak is uncertain.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:5 Joseph had a dream. In Genesis, dreams are
normally associated with divine revelations (see 20:3; 28:12; 31:10–11; 40:5–
8; 41:1).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:8 Joseph’s brothers understand Joseph’s first dream to
mean that he will reign over them.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:9–11 The second dream reinforces the expectation that
Joseph will have authority over the rest of his family. Shall I and your
mother. When Joseph had this dream, his mother Rachel was probably dead
(see 35:16–19); “your mother” refers to Leah.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:12–14 Shechem. See note on 33:17–18.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:15–17 Since his brothers have moved farther north,
Joseph travels from Shechem to Dothan, a journey of about 16 to 20 miles (26
to 32 km), to find them.
FACT
A long walk! Jacob sent Joseph to see how his brothers were doing, as they
tended their sheep (37:14). Joseph headed northward, probably walking, and
didn’t find his brothers until he came to Dothan (v. 17). The journey would
have been more than 50 miles (80 km)!
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:18–20 this dreamer. The brothers’ comment is full of
sarcasm. The expression implies “master/owner of the dreams.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:21–22 As the oldest, Reuben convinces his brothers not
to kill Joseph. Reuben plans to rescue Joseph later and restore him to his
father.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:25 caravan of Ishmaelites. These traders come from
the Sinai Peninsula. Although initially identified as Ishmaelites (a broad
category covering various people groups), in vv. 28 and 36 they are
specifically called Midianites. coming from Gilead. See note on 31:21.
camels. See note on 12:16.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:26–27 Judah said to his brothers. Although Judah
shows compassion by not wanting to kill Joseph, he may have seen an
opportunity to profit from selling his brother.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:29–30 tore his clothes. A visible sign of intense anguish
and pain. where shall I go? Reuben’s grief might not be about the loss of
Joseph but about how upset his father will be with Reuben when he learns that
Joseph is gone (see note on vv. 21–22).
FACT
A costly demonstration of grief. The Hebrew custom of tearing one’s
garments (37:29, 34) was an expression of grief, often after learning of the
death of a loved one. It would surely have had great significance in a day
when most people owned very few items of clothing.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:34 put sackcloth on his loins. A common mourning
custom.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 37:35 I shall go down to Sheol. Jacob believes that his
grief will continue through the afterlife. “Sheol” is the proper name for the
place where people go after death, though specific knowledge about the
afterlife was lacking at this time.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:1–30 The shocking account of Judah’s relationship with
Tamar, which interrupts the story of Joseph in Egypt, fulfills an important role
in Genesis by providing a record of Judah’s family line. The chapter concludes
with a birth account in which a firstborn twin is pushed aside by his younger
brother, Perez. The royal line of David—and therefore of Jesus Christ—will
come from Perez. Although this chapter shows Judah at his worst, it also
provides the background for the remarkable transformation in his life seen later
in Genesis.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:1–2 A sense of danger is suggested through Judah’s
separation from the rest of his family, his friendship with Hirah (a native of
the Canaanite city of Adullam), and his marriage to a Canaanite woman. In
Genesis, marriages to Canaanites are never viewed in a positive light (see 24:3;
26:34–35; 28:1).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:6–7 The nature of Er’s wickedness is unknown. No
information on Tamar’s background is provided, although it is likely that she
was a Canaanite.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:8 Judah instructs his second son Onan to fulfill the
custom of “levirate marriage,” which required a brother to marry his brother’s
childless widow and give her children. See Deut. 25:5–10. It plays an
important role in the book of Ruth (Ruth 1:11–13; 4:1–12). Judah is eager that
Tamar should have a son to continue the firstborn line of Er.
FACT
Levirate marriage is the practice of a man marrying the widow of his
deceased brother, if she had no children (38:8). A child of this second
marriage would provide security for the widow and would carry on the name
of the deceased brother.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:9 Onan knew that the offspring would not be his.
While publicly Onan appears to fulfill his father’s request, in private he refuses
to father a child on behalf of Er. he would waste the semen on the ground.
Onan avoided impregnating Tamar. He probably selfishly feared that a son
born to Tamar would reduce the importance of his own family line and his
share of Judah’s inheritance.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:11 Judah protects his remaining son, Shelah, by sending
Tamar back to her own family. He implies that one day she will marry Shelah.
He treats Tamar as if she were dangerous, while it was actually the sons’ evil
actions that brought about their deaths.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:12 Sometime later Judah becomes a widower. After a
period of mourning he travels to Timnah. Two locations are known by this
name, but this one is probably in the southern hill country of Judah (see Josh.
15:57).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:13–14 Having waited for Judah to fulfill his promise
regarding Shelah (v. 11), Tamar decides to take action. She puts off her
widow’s garments and covers herself with a veil, possibly intending to
remind Judah that she is promised to Shelah. She goes to the entrance to
Enaim, hoping to meet her father-in-law.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:15 When Judah sees Tamar, he assumes that she is a
prostitute, for she had covered her face. Since engaged women also wore
veils, Judah’s belief that Tamar is a prostitute would not have been simply
based on her covered face. Her being alone by the roadside possibly
contributed to his assumption (Jer. 3:2 links “waysides” with prostitution).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:16–18 Tamar’s request, What will you give me . . . ?
recalls Judah’s refusal to give her Shelah.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:21 Ironically, Hirah’s description of Tamar as a cult
prostitute introduces into the account a religious dimension linked to fertility
rituals. The term used by Hirah is rarely used in the OT (see Deut. 23:17; Hos.
4:14).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:24–26 When Judah discovers that he was responsible
for Tamar’s pregnancy, he acknowledges her righteousness in contrast to his
own failure. This marks an important turning point for Judah.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 38:27–30 With its focus on the identity of the firstborn, this
birth account suggests that something significant will happen among the
descendants of Perez.
Egypt at the Time of Joseph
c. 1900 B.C.
Joseph arrived in Egypt during the reign of the Twelfth Dynasty, arguably the zenith of Egypt’ s power.
Shortly before this era, Upper and Lower Egypt had been unified under one ruler, and now Egyptian
influence expanded south and east. The regular flooding of the Nile River provided a relatively stable
supply of food and offered some degree of protection from the famines suffered by other lands of the
ancient Near East.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 39:1–23 In Egypt, Joseph maintains his integrity by
refusing to lie with Potiphar’s wife, which results in his being wrongfully
imprisoned.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 39:1 This verse, which echoes 37:36, reintroduces Joseph
as the main character of the story that follows.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 39:2–5 The LORD was with Joseph. Joseph’s life in Egypt
is governed by God’s providential care (see 50:20). God’s blessing will come
through Joseph (compare 12:3; 18:18; 22:17; 30:27).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 39:6–9 Handsome in form and appearance echoes 29:17,
which describes Joseph’s mother Rachel. Joseph recognizes that to give in to
Potiphar’s wife would be an offense against his master and against God (see
Ps. 51:4).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 39:13–15 Concerning the term “Hebrew,” see note on
10:21–32.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 39:20 Joseph’s imprisonment where the king’s prisoners
were confined will prove significant for future developments.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:1–41:57 Some time after Joseph was imprisoned (ch.
39), two royal attendants are imprisoned for offending Pharaoh. With God’s
help, Joseph interprets their dreams. This prepares the way for Joseph to be
later summoned from prison to interpret Pharaoh’s dreams.
FACT
Cupbearers (40:1) were high-ranking officials who served the kings of the
ancient Near East. Their job was dangerous: before bringing any drink to the
king, they tasted it to make sure that it had not been poisoned.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:1 committed an offense against. In 39:9 the same
Hebrew verb is translated “sin against.” The cupbearer and baker have sinned
against their lord, who enjoyed divine status as king of Egypt. The repetition
of the rarely used expression “king of Egypt” emphasizes the seriousness of
their offense. The cupbearer and baker provided the king with drink and food.
They had unique access to him and were trusted to keep him from being
poisoned.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:2–3 captain of the guard. This same title is given to
Potiphar (37:36; 39:1). Since Potiphar’s name is not used in this context,
however, the captain is probably another person.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:4 In prison, Joseph served a captain of the guard and
managed the affairs of his house.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:5–8 In the ancient Near East, dreams were often viewed
as a medium of divine revelation.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:14–15 remember me. See note on v. 23. that they
should put me into the pit. While Joseph’s remark relates to Egypt, his
mention of “the pit” recalls what his brothers did to him in Canaan (see 37:18–
28).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:18–19 In three days Pharaoh will lift up your head—
from you! The baker’s corpse was to be hung on a tree and possibly
decapitated.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:20–22 Pharaoh’s birthday may refer to his actual
birthday or to the anniversary of his becoming ruler, when pardons were more
often granted. As Joseph said, the heads of both men are lifted up.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 40:23 the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph. The
reader knows that God will “remember” Joseph, as he does other people (8:1;
19:29; 30:22).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:1 After two whole years. These events take place two
years after the chief cupbearer has been released from prison. Joseph is now 30
years old (see v. 46) and has been in Egypt for about 12 or 13 years (see 37:2).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:8 the magicians of Egypt. These were probably cultic
officials who interpreted omens and signs, not illusionists who performed to
entertain.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:12 A young Hebrew emphasizes that Joseph is not
Egyptian.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:14 Social customs required that Joseph be shaved and
clothed before entering Pharaoh’s presence. Out of the pit shows what it was
like for Joseph to be in prison.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:15–16 God, not Joseph, will answer Pharaoh’s request
(see 40:8).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:17–24 Pharaoh’s repetition of vv. 1–8 shows the
importance of the dreams.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:25–36 Stressing that the dreams come from God, Joseph
says that the similar content of the dreams means they will be fulfilled soon.
Joseph’s detailed instructions impress Pharaoh.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:38 the Spirit of God. While Pharaoh undoubtedly
interpreted this according to his own religious outlook, on various occasions
God empowered people for special service by giving them his Spirit (see, e.g.,
Ex. 31:3; Judg. 3:10).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:40–41 Joseph is appointed to govern all the people of
Egypt, second only to Pharaoh himself.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:42–43 To show Joseph’s special status, Pharaoh gives
him his royal signet ring, dresses him appropriately, and provides royal
transport.
FACT
Signets were seals that bore a unique mark representing their owner. Some
signets were worn around the neck; others were worn as rings (41:42). The
signet was pressed into soft clay to leave an impression of its mark. Signet
impressions were used to certify important documents.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:45 called Joseph’s name Zaphenath-paneah. Joseph is
fully integrated into the royal court when Pharaoh gives him an Egyptian name
and a wife. Marrying into a prominent priestly family gives Joseph additional
acceptance.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:50–52 The name Manasseh sounds like the Hebrew
word for “forget,” suggesting that things have moved on for Joseph. Ironically,
however, the name also reminds him of his father’s household. Ephraim,
which means “twice fruitful,” recalls the theme of being fruitful (see note on
1:28).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 41:54–57 As predicted in Pharaoh’s dreams, the seven years
of plenty are followed by a famine that extends well beyond Egypt. Joseph’s
preparations ensure that food is available for the Egyptians and all the earth
(v. 57; that is, all the eastern Mediterranean region; see note on 6:17).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 42:1–38 Shortage of food in Canaan forces Jacob to send
his sons to Egypt, but Benjamin, Joseph’s younger brother, remains at home,
for Jacob fears losing him, too. When Joseph encounters his brothers again, he
deliberately conceals his identity. After accusing them of being spies, he holds
Simeon hostage, sending the others back to Canaan on the understanding that
they will return with Benjamin. Naturally, Jacob is very reluctant to permit
this.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 42:6–9 About 20 years have passed since his brothers last
saw Joseph. While Joseph recognizes them, they do not know who he is.
bowed themselves before him. Joseph interprets the brothers’ action as
fulfilling his earlier dreams (37:5–11). Speaking through an interpreter and
without disclosing his true identity, Joseph accuses his brothers of being spies.
the nakedness of the land. A figure of speech referring to locations where
Egypt would be most vulnerable to attack.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 42:10–17 this day with our father (v. 13). Seizing on this
reference to Benjamin, Joseph demands that the brothers prove their
trustworthiness by sending for him (v. 16). Then, to show his power, Joseph
has them placed in custody for three days (v. 17).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 42:36–38 Reuben’s response (v. 37) does little to reassure
his father. Jacob is unlikely to entrust Benjamin to someone who cares so little
for the lives of his own sons.
FACT
Money in the form of coins did not come into use until around the sixth
century B.C. In Joseph’s time, in the nineteenth century B.C., items such as
spices, gems, or precious metals were used as money.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 42:38 Sheol. See note on 37:35.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 43:1–34 The ongoing famine eventually forces Jacob to
send his sons back to Egypt with Benjamin. When the brothers return, they are
unexpectedly invited to dine at Joseph’s house.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 43:1–10 Judah tries to persuade his father in a different way
(see 42:37). First, he repeats what the man said, emphasizing that Joseph will
not see them unless their brother is with them (43:3–5). Second, Judah offers
himself as a pledge for the safety of Benjamin (v. 9).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 43:30–31 his compassion grew warm for his brother.
Seeing Benjamin for the first time in 20 years, Joseph leaves the room so he
can weep.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 43:32 by himself. Joseph eats apart from his brothers to
keep up his disguise since it was an abomination to the Egyptians to eat with
these foreigners, the Hebrews.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 44:1–34 Still disguising his true identity from his brothers,
Joseph sends them away after the meal. But he gives instructions that his silver
cup should be placed in the sack of Benjamin in order to accuse him of theft.
Later, when the cup is found in Benjamin’s sack, the brothers are forced to
return and face Joseph once more. When Joseph threatens to hold on to
Benjamin, Judah pleads that he should become Joseph’s slave in place of
Benjamin.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 44:3–5 my lord . . . practices divination. Since the
steward’s remarks are in the context of deliberate deception, it is impossible to
know whether he was saying that Joseph actually practiced divination.
However, Joseph clearly intends that his brothers believe that he has
supernatural powers (see v. 15).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 44:11–13 they tore their clothes. See 37:29.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 44:14–17 Do you not know that a man like me can
indeed practice divination? Building on what his steward had said earlier
(see v. 5), Joseph pretends he is able to discover secrets, and Judah apparently
believes him: God has found out the guilt of your servants. Judah probably
has in mind the brothers’ treatment of Joseph, for he knows that they are
innocent of taking the silver cup.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 44:18 Judah wants to speak to Joseph in private to ask him
for an important favor.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 44:29 Sheol. See note on 37:35.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 44:30–34 please let your servant remain instead of the
boy. Judah’s selfless attitude is very different from his previous behavior (see
37:26–27). Before, Judah cared little about the impact that Joseph’s absence
would have on his father.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 45:1–28 Moved by Judah’s speech, Joseph is unable to
restrain his emotions. He reveals his true identity to his amazed brothers. In a
long speech he attempts to lessen their sense of guilt by stressing God’s role in
sending him to Egypt in order to preserve the lives of his family. With the
famine set to continue for another five years, Joseph sends his brothers back to
Canaan in order to bring the rest of his family to Egypt. The narrator makes no
comment on whether Joseph’s deception of his brothers was right. The
emphasis is on the consequences: the brothers acknowledged their guilt for
what they did to Joseph, and they were concerned for their father and their
youngest brother. This allowed for forgiveness between Joseph and his
brothers.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 45:8 Joseph probably calls himself a father to Pharaoh to
express his commitment to Pharaoh’s well-being.
FACT
Joseph’s words “God sent me” reveal his faith in the providence of God who
used his brothers’ evil act for great good—the preservation of Joseph and all
his family (45:7). That same preserving providence of God is at work today
all around the world to govern the lives of God’s people.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 45:10 The precise location of the land of Goshen is not
known. It was probably a region in the eastern delta of the Nile, in the area of
the Wadi Tumilat. Joseph chooses Goshen because it was good land for
herdsmen and it was close to him. It was far enough away from Egypt, though,
that the family would keep their ethnic and religious distinctiveness.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:1–27 Jacob brings his family to Egypt. Verses 1–7
describe the journey to Egypt. Verses 8–27 list the people who made the
journey.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:1 Jacob travels south to Beersheba, where his father
Isaac (see 26:23–33) and grandfather Abraham (21:22–34) lived for a time. For
more on Beersheba, see note on 21:31.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:2–4 Before Jacob leaves for Egypt, God speaks to him
in a vision at night (v. 2). Previously, God had forbidden Isaac to go to Egypt
during a famine (26:1–5). I will also bring you up again is both a promise of
the exodus from Egypt (like 15:13–16) and a reassurance that Jacob himself
will be buried in the Promised Land.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:5–7 Jacob took everything he owned and his entire
family with him to Egypt.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:8–15 Although Reuben (v. 8) was the first son born to
Jacob, his official status as firstborn was transferred to Joseph (see 1 Chron.
5:1–2). his sons and his daughters numbered thirty-three. The reference to
daughters here is puzzling, since only one daughter, Dinah, is mentioned in the
preceding list. These verses actually list 34 people associated with Leah (Gen.
46:15). The total of 33 probably represents some other method of counting.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:20 On Joseph’s wife and sons, see notes on 41:45;
41:50–52.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:26–27 The relationship between the numbers sixty-six
and seventy presents a difficulty. The four totals linked to Jacob’s wives in vv.
8–25 add up to 70, which is the figure recorded in v. 27 (compare Deut. 10:22).
Yet Gen. 46:26 mentions 66 persons as belonging to Jacob, excluding his
sons’ wives. The numbers should be treated with caution. The Septuagint
adjusts the number of Joseph’s sons from two to nine and totals the number of
Jacob’s descendants in Egypt as 75, not 70 (see Acts 7:14 and note). Perhaps
70 is a round number, expressing the idea that all Israel went down to Egypt.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 46:31–34 Joseph prepares his brothers for a possible
meeting with Pharaoh. To guarantee that they will be given the land of Goshen,
he tells them to say they are keepers of livestock (which would include cattle
and sheep) and that this is their traditional occupation. every shepherd is an
abomination to the Egyptians (v. 34). The reason for the Egyptians’ dislike of
shepherds is unknown.
FACT
The Land of Goshen probably covered a small area. But it was very fertile
and was a good place to raise sheep and cattle (46:28–34).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:1–6 Joseph introduces five of his brothers to Pharaoh,
mentioning that his family is now in the land of Goshen.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:7–10 Joseph introduces his father Jacob to Pharaoh.
Jacob blessed Pharaoh (vv. 7, 10). This could have been simply words of
greeting and farewell. But it fits with the pattern of Abraham and his
descendants mediating God’s blessing to others (12:3). How many are the
days of the years of your life? Pharaoh’s question may have been motivated
by the belief that a long life was a sign of divine favor. Few and evil have
been . . . the years of my life. Perhaps Jacob is referring to events such as his
treatment of Esau or his sons’ deceiving him about Joseph. While Jacob is now
130 years old, Abraham and Isaac lived to be 175 and 180, respectively. The
Hebrew term translated sojourning implies that Jacob and his fathers had no
permanent home and perhaps anticipated something better to come. Compare
Heb. 11:10.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:11–12 Joseph assigns land to his family in the land of
Rameses. Previously, the name “land of Goshen” has been used for the
territory where they were to live (e.g., 45:10; 46:28). The name “Rameses” is
most often associated with the great thirteenth-century-B.C. Egyptian king
Rameses II. While it is possible that the actual name “Rameses” goes back to
the time of Joseph, this may be an example of a later term being substituted for
an earlier name (see note on 14:13–16).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:13–14 The famine is so severe that the Egyptians
eventually run out of money to buy grain.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:15–17 When all their money is gone, the Egyptians
appeal to Joseph for help. He responds by offering to buy their livestock. This
sustains the Egyptians for another year.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:18–25 With no money and no livestock, the Egyptians
sell their land and even themselves, as debt-slaves, to Pharaoh. They also ask
for seed to grow for the future. Joseph willingly grants these requests. The
people’s response (You have saved our lives; v. 25) shows that they have a
positive opinion of Joseph. Joseph provides seed on the understanding that
they may keep for themselves four fifths of the harvest (v. 24). While
Pharaoh’s share of one fifth may seem excessive, this must be viewed in light
of the people’s having no other means of sustaining themselves. A less kind
ruler might have kept even more for himself.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:27–31 While the Egyptians struggle to survive during
the famine, Jacob’s family grows and prospers. The idea of being fruitful and
multiplying first appears in 1:22, 28 and is repeated throughout Genesis (see
9:1, 7; 17:20; 28:3; 35:11; 48:4). Jacob asks to be buried in Canaan, for he
knows that the family’s future lies there.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 47:28–31 Jacob’s approaching death, at age 147, dominates
the final chapters of Genesis. put your hand under my thigh. See note on
24:9. bowed himself upon the head of his bed. Jacob bows—possibly in
worship, or perhaps in gratitude to Joseph (which would fulfill Joseph’s dream;
37:9–11), or because of his frailty. Quoting from the Septuagint, Heb. 11:21
says that Jacob bowed over “the head of his staff.”
GENESIS—NOTE ON 48:1–49:28 When Jacob is very old and close to death, he
pronounces a variety of blessings on his sons. He first blesses Joseph’s two
sons, Manasseh and Ephraim (ch. 48), and then all his own sons (49:1–28).
FACT
“Do not bury me in Egypt.” Once a family burial plot had been established,
it was customary for future generations to be buried there as well (47:29‑30).
This helped to tie the family closer together and also to secure their property
rights.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 48:3–7 Jacob refers to the appearance of God at Bethel,
recalling God’s promises there (see 28:13–15). He elevates his grandsons
Ephraim and Manasseh to the status of full sons, on par with Reuben and
Simeon (48:5). Later, this will result in Joseph’s descendants being viewed as
two separate tribes. When the land in Canaan is assigned (Joshua 13–21),
Joseph’s descendants receive one-sixth of the territory. This double portion
confirms that Joseph was designated “firstborn” in place of Reuben (see 1
Chron. 5:1–2; and note on Gen. 35:22–23). By naming Ephraim before
Manasseh (compare 48:1), Jacob anticipates what will happen in vv. 13–19.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 48:8–10 With his eyesight failing, Jacob finds it difficult to
identify Joseph’s two sons.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 48:13–20 By placing his right hand on the head of
Ephraim (v. 13), Jacob gives him priority over his older brother Manasseh
(see 41:51–52). Joseph protests, thinking his father has mistakenly placed his
right hand on the wrong head (48:17–18). Jacob insists that Ephraim should be
blessed as the firstborn, meaning that the special family line traced throughout
Genesis will continue through Ephraim’s descendants. The Ephraimites will
become one of the leading tribes, with Joshua guiding the people into the
Promised Land. But God will later reject the Ephraimites in favor of Judah (see
Ps. 78:67–71).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 48:21–22 Jacob anticipates that, after his death, his family
will return to Canaan. He gives Joseph one mountain slope that he took from
the Amorites, possibly referring to 34:25–29 (see 33:18–19; Josh. 24:32).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:1–2 After blessing Joseph and his two sons, Jacob
summons all his other sons together to tell them what will happen in the days
to come (or “in the latter days”; see note on Isa. 2:2).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:3–4 Reuben’s special standing as the firstborn is taken
away because of his shocking behavior with Jacob’s concubine, Bilhah (35:22–
23).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:5–7 Jacob’s statement regarding Simeon and Levi
centers on their violent behavior (see ch. 34). Their descendants will be
scattered throughout the other tribes (49:7). This will prevent them from
bringing destruction on the whole nation. Fulfilling this prophecy, the Levites,
as the priestly tribe, receive 48 cities distributed throughout the other tribes
(Num. 18:23–24; 35:1–8; Josh. 21:1–45) and the Simeonites are assigned land
within the territory of Judah (Josh. 19:1–9).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:8–12 As with the other blessings, Jacob sees the
descendants of Judah in the light of Judah’s own personal qualities. The
nations will bring “tribute” (money or other gifts) and pledge their obedience
to one of his descendants. Jacob thus predicts the great empire of David, and
the greater kingdom of Jesus Christ, the second David. Abraham’s blessing
will come to the Gentiles as Christ includes them in his kingdom. To
emphasize Judah’s future royal status, he is compared to a lion, and one of his
descendants will hold a scepter and a ruler’s staff. If the phrase until tribute
comes to him is taken to mean “until Shiloh comes” (see esv footnote), then it
could refer to the departure of the ark of the covenant from Shiloh, when the
tribe of Judah (in the person of David) replaced the tribe of Ephraim as Israel’s
leading tribe (see Ps. 78:59–72, which summarizes the events in 1–2 Samuel).
The royal line of Judah culminates with Jesus Christ (Matt. 1:1–16).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:13 Zebulun is listed here before Issachar, although
Issachar was born before Zebulun (30:17–20). at the shore of the sea. Since
Zebulun’s territory did not actually extend to the Mediterranean Sea (see Josh.
19:10–16), Jacob’s remarks are difficult to interpret. haven for ships. Major
trading routes from the coast, which lay about 10 miles (16 km) to the west,
ran through the region of Zebulun, and Zebulunites were involved in the
coastal commerce of exporting and importing. And, if “Sidon” refers to
Phoenicia in general, then the statement that his border shall be at Sidon is
appropriate.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:14–15 Although Jacob’s blessing of Issachar
emphasizes the strength of his descendants, it also indicates that like a donkey
they will be forced to work for others.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:16–18 Jacob sees in Dan and his descendants both
positive and negative qualities. Their snakelike behavior is later seen in their
assault on the unsuspecting inhabitants of Laish (Judges 18). Dan shall judge.
The name “Dan” is a play on the Hebrew word “judge” (see Gen. 30:6). I wait
for your salvation, O LORD. Jacob’s pronouncements are interrupted here by a
brief prayer that shows his concern for his descendants. Without divine help
they will not survive.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:19 The descendants of Gad will become skillful
warriors to defend their land, in the region of Gilead east of the Jordan River.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:20 Asher’s descendants will enjoy success. Their
territory along the coastal plain of Acco will provide fertile land and harbors
for trade.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:21 Compared to a graceful doe, the tribe of Naphtali
will flourish amid the rich natural resources of upper Galilee.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:22–26 Jacob reserves his longest blessing for Joseph,
confirming his special standing. The references to God (using a variety of
divine titles), along with the emphasis on blessing, give this pronouncement an
added dimension. Joseph has survived, sustained by the Mighty One of Jacob.
Jacob prays that Joseph’s descendants will experience blessings that exceed
those given to Abraham and Isaac.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:27 Using the image of a wolf, Jacob reveals that the
descendants of Benjamin will be aggressive warriors (e.g., 1 Chron. 8:40;
12:2).
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:29–50:14 Jacob’s desire to be buried in Hebron shows
his belief that, as God has promised, the future for his descendants will be in
Canaan rather than in Egypt.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 49:29–33 In his final instruction to his sons, Jacob asks to
be buried with his fathers in the cave Abraham purchased from Ephron the
Hittite (see ch. 23). The burials of Abraham and Isaac are recounted in 25:8–
10 and 35:27–29. While Jacob says that Rebekah and Leah were also buried
at Machpelah (49:30), this information is not recorded elsewhere in Genesis.
was gathered to his people. This phrase, commonly used in connection with
dying, seems to reflect a belief in being reunited with others in the afterlife.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:1–3 Jacob’s body was embalmed so that it could be
transported to Hebron. The seventy days of mourning reflects Egyptian royal
practice. Jacob is being shown great honor.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:7–9 Probably because Joseph was highly respected, the
funeral procession includes a large number of prominent Egyptian officials and
public figures.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:10–11 Coming to the threshing floor of Atad, the
funeral procession halts to mourn for seven days. The expression beyond the
Jordan could place Atad in either Canaan or Transjordan.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:12–14 These verses confirm that Jacob’s request (49:29–
32) was carried out.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:15–17 Afraid to address Joseph face-to-face, the
brothers send a message confessing their guilt and seeking his forgiveness.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:18–21 Probably encouraged by news of Joseph’s kind
response to their message, the brothers came and fell down before him.
Once again, their bowing and their words, Behold, we are your servants,
fulfill Joseph’s dreams (37:5–10). Echoing what he had already said (see 45:5–
9), Joseph stresses that God transformed their evil into good. Many people
have been kept alive as a result. The principle that God ultimately overrules
human sin for his glory and the good of mankind is important in Scripture
(Acts 3:13–26; Rom. 8:28). Joseph’s gracious, forgiving attitude unites the
family.
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:22–23 Joseph lives long enough to see the
grandchildren or great-grandchildren of Ephraim. The precise meaning of
third generation is unclear.
FACT
God’s providence. When Joseph’s brothers sold him into slavery, the
outcome could have been tragic. But God in his providence brought good
out of their evil actions (50:20). This was a foreshadowing of God’s bringing
the ultimate good—eternal salvation for anyone who will receive it,
whatever their ethnic or cultural background—out of the wicked actions of
the men who crucified Jesus (Acts 2:22–24).
JOSEPH
Joseph was the son of Jacob and his favored wife Rachel. Jacob therefore
showed favoritism toward Joseph, which made his brothers despise him. Out
of jealousy, they sold him into slavery. Joseph was taken to Egypt, where he
was purchased by a royal official. Joseph was imprisoned on false charges
but was released after interpreting the dreams of Pharaoh. Because the
dreams had predicted seven years of famine, Pharaoh put Joseph in charge
of preparing for the famine. During the famine Joseph’s family unknowingly
came to him for help, and Joseph forgave his brothers and rescued his
family. Through Joseph, God used evil to work out his good purposes,
foreshadowing the time when he would bring the supreme good of eternal
salvation out of the wicked actions of those who crucified Jesus. (Genesis
50:19–20)
GENESIS—NOTE ON 50:24–26 With death near, Joseph makes arrangements for
his bones to be taken to Canaan. Later, Moses fulfills this instruction (Ex.
13:19), and Joseph’s remains are eventually buried at Shechem (Josh. 24:32).
E x o d u s
(return to table of contents)
Exodus 1 • Exodus 2 • Exodus 3 • Exodus 4 • Exodus 5 • Exodus 6
•
Exodus 7 • Exodus 8 • Exodus 9 • Exodus 10 • Exodus 11 • Exodus 12
•
Exodus 13 • Exodus 14 • Exodus 15 • Exodus 16 • Exodus 17 • Exodus 18
Exodus 19 • Exodus 20 • Exodus 21 • Exodus 22 • Exodus 23 • Exodus 24
Exodus 25 • Exodus 26 • Exodus 27 • Exodus 28 • Exodus 29 • Exodus 30
Exodus 31 • Exodus 32 • Exodus 33 • Exodus 34 • Exodus 35 • Exodus 36
Exodus 37 • Exodus 38 • Exodus 39 • Exodus 40
•
•
•
•
Introduction to Exodus
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Key Themes
Outline
The Journey to Mount Sinai
Global Message of Exodus
The Continued Story of Redemptive History
The Meaning of the Exodus
God’s “Firstborn Son”
Universal Themes in Exodus
The Global Message of Exodus for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Exodus
Introduction to Exodus
Timeline
Author and Date
Exodus (meaning exit) is best understood to have been written primarily by
Moses, like the rest of the Pentateuch, though some details (such as the
narrative of his death in Deuteronomy 34) were clearly added at a later time. It
also appears that some language and references were updated for later readers.
There is no consensus among scholars as to the date when the events of the
exodus took place. A common view is that the exodus occurred in c. 1446 B.C.
This is based on the calculation of 480 years from Israel’s departure from
Egypt to the fourth year of Solomon’s reign (c. 966 B.C.; see 1 Kings 6:1).
However, because Exodus 1:11 depicts Israel working on a city called
Raamses, some scholars believe that this would suggest that the exodus
occurred during the reign of Raamses II in Egypt (c. 1279–1213 B.C.), possibly
around 1260 B.C. (see note on 1 Kings 6:1).
Theme
The overarching theme of Exodus is the fulfillment of God’s promises to the
patriarchs. The success of the exodus must be credited to the power and
purpose of God, who remembers his promises, punishes sin, and forgives the
repentant. The book highlights Moses’ faithfulness and prayerfulness.
Key Themes
1. Covenant promises. The events and instructions in Exodus are described
as the Lord remembering his covenant promises to Abraham (2:24; 3:6,
14–17; 6:2–8). The promises extend to both Abraham’s descendants and
all the nations of the world (Gen. 12:1–3). They include land (which Israel
will inhabit), numerous offspring (which will secure their ongoing
identity), and blessing (God cares for them and other nations). The
fulfillment of these promises is rooted in Israel’s covenant relationship
with the Lord (Gen. 17:7–8).
2. Covenant mediator. Moses mediates between the Lord and his people.
Through Moses the Lord reveals his purposes to Israel and sustains the
covenant relationship.
3. Covenant presence. God’s presence with his people is highlighted
throughout the book of Exodus.
Outline
I. Exodus of Israel from Egypt (1:1–18:27)
A. Setting: Israel in Egypt (1:1–2:25)
B. Call of Moses (3:1–4:31)
C. Moses and Aaron: initial request (5:1–7:7)
D. Plagues and exodus (7:8–15:21)
E. Journey (15:22–18:27)
II. Covenant at Sinai (19:1–40:38)
A. Setting: Sinai (19:1–25)
B. Covenant words and rules (20:1–23:33)
C. Covenant confirmed (24:1–18)
D. Instructions for the tabernacle (25:1–31:17)
E. Moses receives the tablets (31:18)
F. Covenant breach, intercession, and renewal (32:1–34:35)
G. Tabernacle: preparation for the presence (35:1–40:38)
The Journey to Mount Sinai
1446 B.C.
Scholars disagree about the precise route of the exodus, but most agree that
Mount Sinai is the site that today is called Jebel Musa (“Mountain of Moses”).
The Global Message of Exodus
The Continued Story of Redemptive History
The book of Exodus continues the story of the redemptive history that God
began in the book of Genesis. The original purpose of Exodus was to help
the people of Israel understand their identity as God’s special people, and to
learn about their covenant obligations to him. They were to see themselves
as God’s “firstborn son” (Ex. 4:22–23) and as a “kingdom of priests” (19:5–
6), called to bring God’s blessings to the nations. Exodus describes how the
Lord delivered Israel from Egyptian oppression (chs. 1–15), brought her
into covenant relationship with himself at Mount Sinai (chs. 16–24), and
came to dwell in her midst in the tabernacle (chs. 25–40).
The Meaning of the Exodus
God’s main purpose in delivering the people of Israel out of Egyptian
oppression was so that he “might dwell among” them (Ex. 29:46). To
understand why God desired to dwell in Israel’s midst, we must consider
the book of Exodus within the larger framework of redemptive history. The
Creator-King’s original intention was that he might dwell among his people,
who would be a flourishing human community in a paradise-kingdom
beginning in Eden and spreading throughout the whole world (see “The
Global Message of Genesis”). The book of Revelation shows that these
original creation intentions remain God’s purpose for his people, and his
purpose will be fulfilled at the end of history (Revelation 21–22). In those
last two chapters of the Bible, as in the Bible’s first two chapters, we see
God dwelling with his people. In the book of Exodus we see this as well, as
Israel learns about their covenant relationship with God, and as he dwells
among them through the tabernacle.
The narrator of Exodus clearly states that the reason why God established
the Mosaic covenant with Israel at Sinai was to carry forward his purpose as
expressed within the earlier covenant with Abraham (Ex. 2:24; 3:6, 15, 16;
6:2–8). God’s promises to Abraham in Genesis 12:1–3 function as his
solution to the problem of the human sin and rebellion that we read about in
Genesis 3–11. In Exodus, God advances his solution to the fall by
establishing Israel as a theocracy (a nation governed directly by God).
Through the Mosaic covenant, Israel becomes the initial fulfillment and
next stage of the promise that in Abraham’s lineage all the families of the
earth would be blessed (Gen. 12:3).
God’s “Firstborn Son”
In Exodus 4:22–23, God announced to Pharaoh that Israel was “my
firstborn son.” In the worldview of ancient Egypt, the firstborn son of a
king would inherit the throne and would be under obligation to manifest the
rule of the supreme deity of his father upon earth. Pharaoh thought of
himself as the son and appointed representative of the supreme god of
Egypt, and he believed that his own firstborn son would inherit this role.
Israel became the Lord’s adopted firstborn son, and so was under
obligation to manifest the Lord’s rule upon earth. The original calling of
humanity to be God’s image-bearers, his appointed representatives, who
establish and extend God’s heavenly rule upon the earth, is now to be
carried forward through the chosen people of Israel. Although Israel largely
failed in this mission, Jesus ultimately suffers the punishment deserved by
God’s people and secures the success of this mission through God’s new
people, the church (Matt. 28:18–20).
Universal Themes in Exodus
The main theme of Exodus is the Lord’s self-revelation in faithfulness,
grace, and power, especially in supremacy over the false gods of the world.
The faithful God. Exodus 3:10–15 is the revelation of the personal name
of God, YHWH, which is rendered in most Bibles with small capital letters,
as “the LORD.” The name is connected to the Hebrew verb “to be,” and its
meaning becomes clear throughout Exodus. First, the Lord is the God who
“will be” with his chosen people to enable them to fulfill their God-given
task (Ex. 3:12). Second, the Lord is the God “who will be who he is” (see
3:14). God will be what he has always been. He is the unchanging, self-
consistent God. He will be faithful forever to his own character and
covenant commitments. Third, the Lord is the God who “will be” sufficient
in his people’s moment of crisis (3:14b). God is faithful and powerful
enough to carry through on his promise to deliver his people from Pharaoh
and the gods of Egypt.
The gracious God. In Exodus 34:5–7, the Lord further unveils the
essence of his character and the significance of his name to Moses, who had
asked to see God’s glory (Ex. 33:18). The context is crucial, for Exodus 32–
34 concerns Israel’s golden calf rebellion. It is in the midst of this crisis that
God reveals that he is “a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for
thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin” (34:6–7). Because
of Israel’s idolatry, the mission to rescue the world nearly collapses as
God’s people forsake him. Yet due to his grace and covenant love, the
mission to bless the whole world (Gen. 12:1–3) continues to advance. The
golden calf incident, however, has revealed that Israel, the one through
whom worldwide blessing was to come, is herself part of the problem.
God’s own people have evil hearts (Ex. 32:9–10, 22; 33:5; 34:9).
The all-powerful God. In the exodus deliverance from Pharaoh, the Lord
reveals himself as the only true God and king of the earth (Ex. 9:16; 15:11,
14–15, 18). In his victory over the world’s most powerful nation, the Lord
demonstrates that its most powerful “gods” were not gods at all (12:12;
15:11). The book of Exodus shows that the God of Abraham is the only true
God of all the earth.
The Global Message of Exodus for Today
Nations, political power, and oppression. Israel’s exodus from Egypt must
be understood as the unique event that it was within the history of
redemption. It would be wrong, therefore, to interpret the book of Exodus
as declaring that God’s primary purpose is to liberate all oppressed people
from political or economic enslavement. If we read Exodus in this way, we
may begin to see the church’s primary mission as working to bring about
political freedom and social justice. This is certainly a worthy and important
goal, and Exodus does demonstrate vividly that God’s ear is drawn to the
groaning of the oppressed (Ex. 2:23–24). God is compassionate and cares
for the widow, the fatherless, and the poor (22:21–27), and the church is
called to do likewise. Yet this is not the main message of Exodus. The
church’s primary mission is the proclamation and living out of the gospel of
Christ—for the fundamental problem plaguing humanity is not political
oppression but its root cause, the evil human heart. And this fundamental
problem is cured only in the work of Christ in dying and rising again. In
doing all of this, Jesus accomplished a greater and final exodus deliverance
for all who will put their trust in him.
The sojourner and the resident alien. In a time when economic crises,
wars, and natural disasters compel individuals and whole peoples to flee
their homelands and seek security in foreign countries, the issue of the
resident alien has become acute throughout the entire global village. In
Exodus, God commands Israel not to oppress the sojourner. He reminds his
people of their own historic experience as oppressed sojourners in Egypt
(Ex. 22:21; 23:9). While the book of Exodus is not a manual for dealing
with the issue of illegal or unwanted immigration, the book certainly
teaches that solutions must be sought with justice and compassion. And
above all, global Christians must remember that they are resident aliens on
earth and, most fundamentally, citizens of heaven (Phil. 3:20; 1 Pet. 1:1;
2:11).
Israel Increases Greatly in Egypt