HABAKKUK 3 [†]A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, according to
Shigionoth.
2[†] O LORD, x I have heard the report of you,
and y your work, O LORD, do I fear.
In the midst of the years z revive it;
in the midst of the years make it known;
a in wrath remember mercy.
3[†] God came from b Teman,
c and the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah
His splendor covered the heavens,
and the earth was full of his praise.
4[†] d His brightness was like the light;
rays flashed from his hand;
and there he veiled his power.
5 e Before him went pestilence,
and plague followed f at his heels. [1]
6[†] He stood g and measured the earth;
he looked and shook the nations;
then the h eternal mountains i were scattered;
the everlasting hills sank low.
His were j the everlasting ways.
7[†] I saw the tents of k Cushan in affliction;
l the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.
8[†] m Was your wrath against the rivers, O LORD?
Was your anger against the rivers,
m or your indignation against the sea,
n when you rode on your horses,
n on your chariot of salvation?
9[†] You stripped the sheath from your bow,
calling for many arrows. [2] Selah
p You split the earth with rivers.
10
q The mountains saw you and writhed;
the raging waters swept on;
r the deep gave forth its voice;
s it lifted its hands on high.
11[†] t The sun and moon stood still in their place
u at the light of your arrows as they sped,
at the flash of your glittering spear.
12[†] v You marched through the earth in fury;
w you threshed the nations in anger.
13[†] v You went out for the salvation of your people,
for the salvation of x your anointed.
y You crushed the head of the house of the wicked,
laying him bare from thigh to neck. [3] Selah
14 You pierced with his own arrows the heads of his warriors,
who came like a whirlwind to scatter me,
rejoicing as if to devour the poor in secret.
15 z You trampled the sea with your horses,
the surging of mighty waters.
16[†] a I hear, and b my body trembles;
my lips quiver at the sound;
c rottenness enters into my bones;
my legs tremble beneath me.
Yet d I will quietly wait for the day of trouble
to come upon people who invade us.
Habakkuk Rejoices in the LORD
17[†] Though the fig tree should not blossom,
nor fruit be on the vines,
the produce of the olive fail
and the fields yield no food,
the flock be cut off from the fold
and there be no herd in the stalls,
18 e yet I will rejoice in the LORD;
f I will take joy in the God of my salvation.
19[†] GOD, the Lord, is my strength;
g he makes my feet like the deer’s;
he makes me h tread on my i high places.
j To the choirmaster: with k stringed [4] instruments.
Study Notes for Habakkuk
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:1 Superscription. “Oracle” translates a common
word for “burden.” Prophets do not typically use the term “prophet” for
themselves, but Habakkuk is called a prophet twice (v. 1; 3:1). This may
be because his book differs significantly from most other prophets.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:2–11 First Cycle. Habakkuk is disappointed
that God does not seem to be answering his prayers. God’s response
shows that, although Habakkuk doesn’t realize it, his prayers are already
being answered.
1:2–4 Habakkuk’ s Lament. Habakkuk believes that God is letting sin go
unpunished and that therefore there is no justice.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:2 O LORD. Habakkuk uses the covenant name for
God, which emphasizes the relationship between God and the prophet. how
long? This is the common beginning of a formal complaint (compare Ps.
13:1, 2). Violence! During much of the latter seventh century B.C., Judah
was morally corrupt, violent, and spiritually disobedient. The description of
Josiah’s reforms in 2 Kings 23 highlights the depths of the people’s
wickedness.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:3 idly look at wrong. It seems to Habakkuk that
God is tolerating sin instead of punishing it (see v. 13).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:4 the law is paralyzed. The Mosaic law had little
impact on the hearts and self-centered desires of these people. justice never
goes forth. The rich were trampling on the rights of the poor. righteous.
There was still a righteous remnant who refused to break God’s laws to get
ahead. But life was hard for them because the wicked took advantage of
them.
1:5–11 God’ s Response. God has already begun to answer Habakkuk’s
request: the Babylonians are coming to punish the Israelites.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:6 I am raising up. God uses nations for his own
purposes (compare Isa. 44:28; Dan. 2:21). Chaldeans. Another name for
the Babylonians, who defeated Assyria in 605 B.C. bitter and hasty nation.
God knows the Babylonians well and uses their character traits to punish
Judah.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:7 their justice and dignity go forth from
themselves. As they built their empire, the Babylonians were not bound by
God’s law or even by any rules of common decency.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:9 The Babylonians were known for their violence.
They gather captives like sand. They continued the Assyrian policy of
deporting captives to other lands.
FACT
The Babylonian horsemen (1:8) were greatly feared by the people they
fought against. Taking advantage of their great speed, they would scatter
the enemy’s foot soldiers and then hunt them down one by one. But even
Babylon’s horses couldn’t save Babylon from the Lord’s hand of
judgment (3:16).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:10 scoff . . . laugh. The powerful Babylonians had
little regard for weaker rulers. Pile up earth describes siege warfare (see
Isa. 29:3; Jer. 32:24).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:12–2:20 Second Cycle. This passage asks an age-
old question: Why does evil seem to go unpunished? God’s answer is that
all who are wicked will eventually be punished; meanwhile, the righteous
must live by faith.
1:12–2:1 Habakkuk’ s Lament. Habakkuk wonders how God can use a
wicked nation to punish a less wicked one.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:12 Are you not from everlasting? Habakkuk
knows that God lives forever (see Ps. 90:2). We shall not die. Habakkuk
bases his confidence in his people’s future on God’s eternal nature. you . . .
have established them. Habakkuk understands that God has chosen
Babylon to punish Judah for its sin.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:13 purer eyes than to see evil. Habakkuk wonders
why God’s holiness did not stop him from using the corrupt Babylonians to
punish a less wicked nation such as Judah.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:14 Habakkuk’s charge against God is that he allows
mankind to act like lower creatures (fish and crawling things), with no
rulers or judges. Thus, wickedness goes unchecked.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:15 He. That is, the “wicked” one in v. 13, which
represents Babylon. hook. See Amos 4:2. Captives were sometimes taken
away with hooks in their noses—an intentionally painful and humiliating
treatment. drags them out with his net. The image is that of a fish
helplessly caught in a net. Mesopotamian art portrays prisoners in nets
being hauled off to captivity.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:16 he sacrifices to his net. The Babylonians had
become so powerful that they relied on their military strength for
protection, the way others would have relied on their gods.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 1:17 mercilessly killing nations forever? If a
righteous God does not step in to end the Babylonians’ wicked plan, who
will? Where is God’s justice, and how can he tolerate this?
2:2–20 God’ s Response. The Lord assures Habakkuk that he will punish all
the wicked, at the right time.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:2 Write the vision. This message from God was to
be recorded as a permanent witness, since it would not be quickly fulfilled.
So he may run who reads it may refer to a messenger reporting the vision
throughout the nation. Or it may refer to those who hear the message and
flee the coming judgment.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:3 the vision awaits its appointed time. God’s
timing for the fulfillment of the message will be perfect. wait for it. While
Judah’s judgment will begin quite soon (586 B.C.), God’s punishment of the
Babylonians will not happen until 539.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:4 his soul. The singular form refers to the
Babylonian nation as a whole, but with a primary reference to the king. A
proud person relies on himself, whereas a righteous person relies on God.
The phrase but the righteous shall live by his faith is quoted in the NT to
emphasize that people are saved by grace through faith (Rom. 1:17; Gal.
3:11; compare Eph. 2:8). It is also quoted to show that Christians should
live by faith (Heb. 10:38–39). The kind of faith that Habakkuk describes,
and that the NT authors affirm, is a continuing trust in God and his
promises, even in the darkest days.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:5 His greed is as wide as Sheol. Sometimes in the
OT, Sheol is the place of the dead where everyone went, yet which never
filled up (see Prov. 30:15–16).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:6–20 This taunt against the Babylonians consists of
five “woe oracles” (vv. 6, 9, 12, 15, 19). They show why Babylon deserves
its coming punishment (compare Isa. 5:8–23).
FACT
Woe oracles. Verses 6–20 of ch. 2 consist of five “woe oracles” against
Babylon. Each of these begins with the word “woe” and condemns the
Babylonians for violence and idolatry.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:6 all these. That is, all the nations that Babylon has
destroyed (see Isa. 14:9–11). Woe. Trouble. The Babylonians are
condemned for their excessive greed in conquering other nations.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:7 debtors. The loot that the Babylonians have
taken from other nations is actually only “on loan” to them until a stronger
nation claims it.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:8 blood of man. God will someday hold the
Babylonians accountable for bloodshed (see 1:17; Gen. 9:6).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:9 Woe. Babylon is condemned for collecting stolen
goods and relying on wealth for protection. set his nest on high. Like the
eagle that builds its nest in unreachable spots, the Babylonians tried to build
a city inaccessible to their enemies (see Isa. 14:4–15; compare Obad. 3–4).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:11 stone will cry out. The stones were taken from
other nations’ buildings or purchased with stolen goods. They will testify
against Babylon.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:12 Woe. Babylon is condemned for its violence and
injustice.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:13 LORD of hosts. Yahweh is the commander of the
heavenly armies, all of which do his will; see note on Amos 3:13. peoples
labor merely for fire. God controls man’s future and will punish injustice.
Babylon’s cities will ultimately be destroyed or given to others.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:14 The glory of the LORD is his special presence
with his people. The glory “filled” the tabernacle and temple (Ex. 40:34–35;
1 Kings 8:11). Several texts look forward to a day when God’s glory fills
the whole earth (Num. 14:21; Ps. 72:19; Isa. 6:3, esv footnote).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:15 Woe. Babylon is condemned for violence
against its neighbors. gaze at their nakedness. That is, strip their land bare
to dishonor them (compare Gen. 9:20–22).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:16 shame. Babylon will experience the same
shame it inflicted on others (see note on v. 15). cup. A symbol of divine
punishment on Babylon (see Isa. 51:17, 22; Jer. 25:15–17; Rev. 14:10).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:17 violence done to Lebanon. Babylon used the
famed cedars of Lebanon for its massive building projects (see Isa. 14:8).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:18 Idols are worthless and lifeless objects
unworthy of the faith placed in them (compare Jer. 10:14–15). Teacher of
lies highlights the deceptive nature of idols.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:19 overlaid with gold and silver. Idols were often
highly decorated in an effort to enhance their prestige.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 2:20 But the LORD. There is a great contrast between
silent, lifeless idols and the awesome living God. He alone deserves the
honor too often given to worthless idols.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:1–19 Habakkuk’ s Prayer. Habakkuk asks for a new
demonstration of God’s wrath and mercy, such as God gave so powerfully
in the past. He closes with a confession of faith and trust in God (compare
vv. 1, 3, 9, 13, 19 with Psalms 17; 90).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:1 Shigionoth occurs only here and in Ps. 7:1. It
may refer to a type of psalm or a musical instrument.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:2 I have heard. Habakkuk had heard of God’s
great saving acts, which he recalls in vv. 3–15 (see Ex. 15:1–21). in wrath
remember mercy. A plea that when God judges, he will also be merciful.
This is how God always deals with his people (see Ex. 34:6–7).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:3 Teman means “south.” Along with the reference
to Mount Paran (Num. 13:26; Deut. 33:2), it may suggest the time
following Israel’s exodus from Egypt. His splendor covered the heavens.
When biblical authors refer to God’s mighty acts in the exodus, they often
use images to instill a sense of fear or awe (see Deut. 33:2; Judg. 5:4–5; Ps.
18:7–15).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:4–5 Habakkuk compares God’s presence at Mount
Sinai to a thunderstorm with darkness and lightning (see Ex. 19:18–20; Ps.
18:9–14). Pestilence and plague often appear as pictures of divine
judgment (Ex. 7:14–12:30; Deut. 28:21–22; Ps. 91:3, 5–6).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:6 eternal mountains. Mountains were considered
part of the foundation of the earth, so their quaking was a sign of divine
judgment (Ps. 18:7; Jer. 4:24–26).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:7 Cushan . . . Midian. These tribes living near
Edom see God’s power and are frightened.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:8 rivers . . . sea. God used his power over the Nile
(Ex. 7:14–24) and Jordan Rivers (Josh. 3:14–17), as well as the Red Sea
(Ex. 14:2–15:5), to demonstrate his greatness in the exodus era. The chariot
of salvation is a picture of God bringing deliverance to this people.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:9 Many arrows probably describes thunderbolts.
split the earth. An image of thunderstorms and floods cutting through the
desert.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:11 Sun and moon stood still refers to Joshua’s
victory at Gibeah (Josh. 10:12–13). The Lord’s victory here will be equally
sensational.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:12 threshed the nations. See Amos 1:3.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:13 God fought for his people (your anointed)
because they were his covenant people, a nation of priests (Ex. 19:6; Ps.
114:2). The head of the house of the wicked may refer to either the
pharaoh of Egypt or the leaders of Canaan.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:16 I hear. Habakkuk realizes he must wait
patiently while his people are punished, and then God will unleash his
power against the Babylonians.
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:17–19 Anticipating great destruction by the
Babylonians, Habakkuk has radically changed. He began by informing God
how to run his world; he ends by trusting that God knows best and will
bring about true justice. Though the fig tree should not blossom. Even
during suffering and loss, Habakkuk has learned that he can trust God. That
trust brings great joy, not in circumstances, but in God himself: yet I will
rejoice in the LORD; I will take joy in the God of my salvation. Yahweh
has become Habakkuk’s strength (see Ps. 18:32, 39).
HABAKKUK—NOTE ON 3:19 he makes my feet like the deer’s. Habakkuk
can have confidence in God. He can live on the heights even during
extreme circumstances (see Mal. 4:2). choirmaster. Probably the director
of the temple musicians. This note suggests that Habakkuk meant this to be
a “prayer” (Hab. 3:1) that the faithful would sing together.
HABAKKUK
Habakkuk was alarmed by the wickedness of his people, the nation of
Judah. He longed for the day when the Lord would bring justice to his
nation by punishing sin. He was even more troubled, however, when he
learned that the Lord would indeed judge Judah but that he would use the
much more wicked nation of Babylon to do so. The book of Habakkuk
records the prophet’s conversation with God about this perplexing issue.
By the end of the book, Habakkuk is convinced that God is sovereign and
that his justice is far beyond comprehension. The prophet will wait for
and trust in God. Habakkuk’s faith serves as an example to believers
today, who like the prophet are called to trust that the God of justice will
indeed accomplish his purposes for the world. (Habakkuk 3:17–19)
Z e p h a n i a h
(return to table of contents)
Zephaniah 1 • Zephaniah 2 • Zephaniah 3
Introduction to Zephaniah
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Purpose and Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Near East at the Time of Zephaniah
Global Message of Zephaniah
Zephaniah in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Zephaniah
The Global Message of Zephaniah for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Zephaniah
Introduction to Zephaniah
Timeline
Author and Date
Zephaniah prophesied during the reign of Josiah (640–609 B.C.), a Judean king
who sought to reestablish acceptable worship practices (2 Kings 22:1–23:30).
Theme
The theme of Zephaniah is the approaching “day of the Lord.” This “day” is
one of judgment against those who sin against God, and one of blessing for
those who follow him.
Purpose and Background
In spite of having seen the destruction and exile of Israel (the northern
kingdom), Judah (the southern kingdom) refuses to keep its covenant
obligations to God. If Judah repents and abandons its evil ways, “perhaps” God
will forgive (2:3). Regardless, God’s judgment will lead to renewal for Judah
and other peoples (3:9–20).
The book declares judgment on many nations, all of which opposed God
through opposition to his people. The last nation warned is Judah herself (3:1–
7). God is displeased with those who claimed to be his own people.
Key Themes
1. God will judge the whole earth (1:2–3, 17–18; 3:8), including Judah (1:4–
16; 3:1–7) and her pagan neighbors (2:4–15) alike.
2. God will bless his people when they return to their covenant relationship
with him (3:11–20).
3. God extends blessing and grace to all peoples and nations (3:9–10).
4. Judgment and blessing occur both in the near future for the prophet and
his audience (1:4–18; 2:3) and also in the more distant future (3:8–9, 11,
13–17).
5. There is no such thing as a second-generation child of God. Every
generation must accept God’s covenant, rather than relying on the faith of
a previous generation.
Outline
I. Heading (1:1)
II. Judgment Coming against Judah (1:2–6)
III. The Day of the Lord (1:7–3:20)
A. Day of sacrifice and punishment (1:7–9)
B. The coming wrath (1:10–18)
C. Repentance is still possible (2:1–3)
D. Nations warned (2:4–3:8)
E. Anticipation of hope (3:9–20)
The Near East at the Time of Zephaniah
c. 620 B.C.
Zephaniah prophesied during the reign of Josiah, when Egypt, Judah, and
Babylonia were eroding the power of Assyria. Shortly after this time the
Babylonians would replace the Assyrians as the dominant power in the Near
East.
The Global Message of Zephaniah
The message of Zephaniah to the global church of the twenty-first century
is the certainty of the coming “day of the LORD” (Zeph. 1:7). On that day,
punishment will be executed on all God’s enemies from many nations
(2:11; 3:8) and salvation will be granted to all God’s people, also from
many nations (3:9–10).
If one of these two themes rises to the surface, however, it is the theme of
global salvation. “From beyond the rivers of Cush”—that is, from beyond
the known ends of the earth in the time of Zephaniah—“my worshipers, the
daughter of my dispersed ones, shall bring my offering” (Zeph. 3:10). After
beginning by denouncing first Judah herself (ch. 1) and then Judah’s
oppressors (ch. 2), the book of Zephaniah ends on a note of triumphant
restoration for God’s people because of his love, restoration that includes in
its sweep peoples from the ends of the earth (3:16–18).
Zephaniah in Redemptive History
The failure of God’ s people. Israel had been called out from the nations of
the earth to be a blessing to those nations (Gen. 12:1–3). Yet this glorious
calling had been tragically frustrated when Israel wound up exhibiting the
same idolatry and selfishness that she had been sent to heal. No one, not
even those called by God to be a light to the nations of the world (Isa. 42:6;
49:6), can escape the corruption and rebellion that fill the earth because of
the fall (Genesis 3).
The judgment of God’ s people. For this reason God needed to punish not
only the wicked nations to whom he had not revealed himself but also the
wicked nation, Israel, to whom he had revealed himself. Rather than
influencing the world, Israel had been influenced by the world. The book of
Zephaniah exists because of this dilemma. The prophecy opens by
recounting Judah’s sin. The northern kingdom of Israel has already been
exiled to Assyria for its sin, and Judah is following fast in the footsteps of
its northern kinsmen.
God’ s refusal to forsake his people. Yet because of the covenant God has
made with Israel, by which he will be their God and they will be his people,
he cannot forsake them, no matter how unfaithful they are. The Lord has
every right to abandon them due to their spiritual adultery. Yet in his great
love, his covenant mercy, he delights instead to “change their shame into
praise and renown in all the earth. . . . I will make you renowned and
praised among all the peoples of the earth” (Zeph. 3:19–20). The Lord will
restore his wayward children before a global audience.
How can God do this, while remaining just? Must not sin, even the sin of
his people, be punished?
Yes, indeed—and in sending his own Son to bear that punishment, God
remains just and punishes sin in what is also a supreme act of covenant
love. For believers, the great day of the Lord is now behind them. This is
because the day of the Lord, “a day of distress and anguish, a day of ruin
and devastation, a day of darkness and gloom” (Zeph. 1:15), was
experienced by Jesus Christ on the cross. He endured the ultimate distress
and anguish, ruin and devastation, darkness and gloom—so that those who
put their trust in him need not eternally endure those things.
Universal Themes in Zephaniah
Worldwide judgment. Even though current circumstances may indicate to
the contrary, all sin will be brought to justice. Rebellious human hearts and
the actions that such hearts produce will not escape the punishment of God.
Specifically, actions against God’s own people will not escape God’s
punishment. The Lord has bound himself to his people. He will bring every
wrong against them to justice.
Worldwide salvation. Alongside the whole-earth dimensions of God’s
judgment stands the whole-earth extension of his mercy. Those who humble
themselves enough to trust him will escape his punishment despite their sin.
For God has taken them into covenant with himself and has dealt with their
sin through the atoning work of his Son. “At that time I will change the
speech of the peoples to a pure speech, that all of them may call upon the
name of the LORD and serve him with one accord” (Zeph. 3:9).
The Global Message of Zephaniah for Today
There is no greater need in the human heart than for divine love. Beneath
every other valid need is the need to be loved by the One who knows us
better even than we know ourselves. And to those who look to him, to those
who make the Lord their refuge, he himself says,
“Fear not, O Zion;
let not your hands grow weak.
The LORD your God is in your midst,
a mighty one who will save;
he will rejoice over you with gladness;
he will quiet you by his love;
he will exult over you with loud singing.” (Zeph. 3:16–17)
Such is the delight of God in heaven over every one of his children—
children in western hemisphere or east, urban or rural, rich or poor.
And this love will be seen “among all the peoples of the earth” (3:20).
The display of God’s love for his own is not a provincial or tepid or
restrained display. God’s covenant love for his people will one day explode
in joyous cosmic celebration as all the suffering undergone by believers is
reversed and they enjoy the glory for which they were created (Rom. 8:18;
Rev. 21:4).