HEBREWS 8 [†]Now the point in what we are saying is this: we have such a
high priest, u one who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in heaven, 2a minister in the holy places, in v the true tent [1] that
the Lord w set up, not man. 3For x every high priest is appointed to offer
gifts and sacrifices; thus y it is necessary for this priest also to have
something to offer.
4[†]Now if he were on earth, he would not be a priest at
all, since there are priests who offer gifts according to the law.
5[†]They
serve z a copy and a shadow of the heavenly things. For when Moses was
about to erect the tent, he was instructed by God, saying, b “See that you
make everything according to the pattern that was shown you on the
mountain.” 6[†]But as it is, Christ [2] has obtained a ministry that is c as
much more excellent than the old as d the covenant e he mediates is better,
since it is enacted on better promises. 7[†] f For if that first covenant had
been faultless, there would have been no occasion to look for a second.
8[†]For he finds fault with them when he says: [3]
g “Behold, the days are coming, declares the Lord,
when I will establish a new covenant with the house of Israel
and with the house of Judah,
9 not like the covenant that I made with their fathers
on the day when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the
land of Egypt.
For they did not continue in my covenant,
and so I showed no concern for them, declares the Lord.
10 h For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel
after those days, declares the Lord:
I will put my laws into their minds,
and i write them on their hearts,
and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.
11 And they shall not teach, each one his neighbor
and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’
for they shall j all know me,
from the least of them to the greatest.
12 For I will be merciful toward their iniquities,
k and I will remember their sins no more.”
13In speaking of a new covenant, he makes the first one obsolete. And
l what is becoming obsolete and growing old is ready to vanish away.
The Earthly Holy Place