ISAIAH 38 [†] q In those days Hezekiah became r sick and was at the point
of death. And s Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him, and said to
him, “Thus says the LORD: Set your house in order, for you shall die, you
shall not recover.” [1] 2Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed
to the LORD,
3[†]and said, “Please, O LORD, remember how t I have walked
before you in faithfulness and with a whole heart, and have done what is
good in your sight.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
4Then the word of the LORD came to Isaiah: 5[†]“Go and say to
Hezekiah, Thus says the LORD, the God of David your father: I have heard
your prayer; I have seen your tears. Behold, I will add u fifteen years to
your life. [2] 6[†] v I will deliver you and this city out of the hand of the king
of Assyria, and will defend this city.
7“This shall be the sign to you from the LORD, that the LORD will do this
thing that he has promised: 8
w Behold, I will make the shadow cast by the
declining sun on the dial of Ahaz turn back ten steps.” So the sun turned
back on the dial the ten steps by which it had declined. [3]
9[†]A writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, after he had been sick and had
recovered from his sickness:
10 I said, x In the middle [4] of my days
I must depart;
I am consigned to the gates of Sheol
for the rest of my years.
11 I said, I shall not see the LORD,
the LORD y in the land of the living;
I shall look on man no more
among the inhabitants of the world.
12 My dwelling is plucked up and removed from me
z like a shepherd’s tent;
a like a weaver b I have rolled up my life;
c he cuts me off from the loom;
d from day to night you bring me to an end;
13 e I calmed myself [5] until morning;
like a lion f he breaks all my bones;
from day to night you bring me to an end.
14 Like g a swallow or a crane I chirp;
h I moan like a dove.
i My eyes are weary with looking upward.
O Lord, I am oppressed; j be my pledge of safety!
15 What shall I say? For he has spoken to me,
and he himself has done it.
k I walk slowly all my years
because of the bitterness of my soul.
16
l O Lord, by these things men live,
and in all these is the life of my spirit.
Oh restore me to health and make me live!
17 m Behold, it was for my welfare
that I had great bitterness;
n but in love you have delivered my life
from the pit of destruction,
n for you have cast all my sins
behind your back.
18 o For Sheol does not thank you;
death does not praise you;
those who go down to the pit do not hope
for your faithfulness.
19 The living, the living, he thanks you,
as I do this day;
p the father makes known to the children
your faithfulness.
20 The LORD will save me,
and we will play my music on stringed instruments
all the days of our lives,
q at the house of the LORD.
21
r Now Isaiah had said, “Let them take a cake of figs and apply it to the
boil, that he may recover.” 22[†]Hezekiah also had said, “What is the sign
that I shall go up to the house of the LORD?”
Envoys from Babylon