ISAIAH 51 [†] d “Listen to me, you who pursue righteousness,
you who seek the LORD:
look to the rock from which you were hewn,
and to the quarry from which you were dug.
2 Look to Abraham your father
and to Sarah who bore you;
for e he was but one when I called him,
that I might bless him and multiply him.
3 For the LORD f comforts Zion;
he comforts all her waste places
and makes her wilderness like g Eden,
her desert like h the garden of the LORD;
i joy and gladness will be found in her,
thanksgiving and the voice of song.
4[†] j “Give attention to me, my people,
and give ear to me, my nation;
k for a law [1] will go out from me,
and I will set my justice for a light to the peoples.
5 l My righteousness draws near,
my salvation has gone out,
and my arms will judge the peoples;
m the coastlands hope for me,
and for my arm they wait.
6 n Lift up your eyes to the heavens,
and look at the earth beneath;
o for the heavens vanish like smoke,
the earth will wear out like a garment,
and they who dwell in it will die in like manner; [2]
p but my salvation will be forever,
and my righteousness will never be dismayed.
7[†] q “Listen to me, you who know righteousness,
the people r in whose heart is my law;
s fear not the reproach of man,
nor be dismayed at their revilings.
8
t For the moth will eat them up like a garment,
and the worm will eat them like wool;
p but my righteousness will be forever,
and my salvation to all generations.”
9[†] u Awake, awake, v put on strength,
O w arm of the LORD;
awake, x as in days of old,
the generations of long ago.
Was it not you who cut y Rahab in pieces,
who pierced z the dragon?
10 a Was it not you who dried up the sea,
the waters of the great deep,
who made the depths of the sea a way
for the redeemed to pass over?
11 b And the ransomed of the LORD shall return
and come to Zion with singing;
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads;
they shall obtain gladness and joy,
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
12[†] “I, I am he c who comforts you;
who are you that you are afraid of d man who dies,
of the son of man who is made e like grass,
13 and have forgotten the LORD, your Maker,
f who stretched out the heavens
and g laid the foundations of the earth,
and you fear continually all the day
because of the wrath of h the oppressor,
when he sets himself to destroy?
And where is the wrath of h the oppressor?
14 i He who is bowed down shall speedily be released;
he shall not die and go down j to the pit,
neither shall his bread be lacking.
15[†] I am the LORD your God,
k who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar—
the LORD of hosts is his name.
16
l And I have put my words in your mouth
m and covered you in the shadow of my hand,
n establishing [3] the heavens
and o laying the foundations of the earth,
and saying to Zion, ‘You are my people.’”
17[†] p Wake yourself, wake yourself,
stand up, O Jerusalem,
q you who have drunk from the hand of the LORD
the cup of his wrath,
who have drunk to the dregs
the bowl, r the cup of staggering.
18 s There is none to guide her
among all the sons she has borne;
there is none to take her by the hand
among all the sons she has brought up.
19
t These two things have happened to you—
who will console you?—
devastation and destruction, famine and sword;
who will comfort you? [4]
20 u Your sons have fainted;
they lie at the head of every street
like an v antelope w in a net;
they are full of the wrath of the LORD,
the rebuke of your God.
21
x Therefore hear this, you who are afflicted,
who are drunk, but not with wine:
22 Thus says your Lord, the LORD,
your God y who pleads the cause of his people:
“Behold, I have taken from your hand r the cup of staggering;
the bowl of my wrath you shall drink no more;
23 z and I will put it into the hand of your tormentors,
a who have said to you,
‘Bow down, that we may pass over’;
and b you have made your back like the ground
and like the street for them to pass over.”
The LORD’s Coming Salvation