ISAIAH 49 [†] Listen to me, k O coastlands,
and give attention, you peoples l from afar.
m The LORD called me from the womb,
from the body of my mother he named my name.
2[†] n He made my mouth like a sharp sword;
o in the shadow of his hand he hid me;
he made me a polished arrow;
in his quiver he hid me away.
3[†] And he said to me, “You are my servant,
Israel, p in whom I will be glorified.” [1]
4
q But I said, “I have labored in vain;
I have spent my strength for nothing and vanity;
yet surely my right is with the LORD,
and my recompense with my God.”
5[†] r And now the LORD says,
he m who formed me from the womb to be his servant,
to bring Jacob back to him;
and that Israel might be gathered to him—
for s I am honored in the eyes of the LORD,
and my God has become my strength—
6 he says:
“It is too light a thing that you should be my servant
to raise up the tribes of Jacob
and to bring back the preserved of Israel;
t I will make you u as a light for the nations,
that v my salvation may reach to the end of the earth.”
7[†] Thus says the LORD,
w the Redeemer of Israel and his Holy One,
x to one deeply despised, abhorred by the nation,
the servant of rulers:
y “Kings shall see and arise;
princes, and they shall prostrate themselves;
because of the LORD, who is faithful,
the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you.”
The Restoration of Israel
8 Thus says the LORD:
z “In a a time of favor I have answered you;
in a day of salvation I have helped you;
I will keep you b and give you
as a covenant to the people,
to establish the land,
c to apportion the desolate heritages,
9 d saying to the prisoners, ‘Come out,’
to those who are in darkness, ‘Appear.’
e They shall feed along the ways;
on all bare heights shall be their pasture;
10
f they shall not hunger or thirst,
neither scorching wind nor sun shall strike them,
for he who has pity on them g will lead them,
and by springs of water will guide them.
11 h And I will make all my mountains a road,
and my highways shall be raised up.
12
i Behold, these shall come from afar,
and behold, j these from the north and from the west, [2]
and these from the land of Syene.” [3]
13[†] k Sing for joy, O heavens, and exult, O earth;
break forth, O mountains, into singing!
For the LORD l has comforted his people
and will have compassion on his afflicted.
14[†] But Zion said, m “The LORD has forsaken me;
my Lord has forgotten me.”
15
n “Can a woman forget her nursing child,
that she should have no compassion on the son of her womb?
Even these may forget,
yet I will not forget you.
16 Behold, o I have engraved you on the palms of my hands;
your walls are continually before me.
17 Your builders make haste; [4]
p your destroyers and those who laid you waste go out from you.
18 q Lift up your eyes around and see;
they all gather, they come to you.
r As I live, declares the LORD,
s you shall put them all on as an ornament;
you shall bind them on as a bride does.
19 “Surely your waste and your desolate places
and your devastated land—
t surely now you will be too narrow for your inhabitants,
and those who swallowed you up will be far away.
20 u The children of your bereavement
will yet say in your ears:
t ‘The place is too narrow for me;
make room for me to dwell in.’
21 Then you will say in your heart:
‘Who has borne me these?
u I was bereaved and barren,
exiled and put away,
but who has brought up these?
Behold, I was left alone;
from where have these come?’”
22[†] Thus says the Lord GOD:
“Behold, I will lift up my hand to the nations,
v and raise my signal to the peoples;
w and they shall bring your sons in their arms, [5]
and your daughters shall be carried on their shoulders.
23 x Kings shall be your foster fathers,
and their queens your nursing mothers.
y With their faces to the ground they shall bow down to you,
and z lick the dust of your feet.
Then you will know that I am the LORD;
a those who wait for me b shall not be put to shame.”
24[†] Can the prey be taken from the mighty,
or the captives of a tyrant [6] be rescued?
25 For thus says the LORD:
c “Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken,
and the prey of the tyrant be rescued,
for I will contend with those who contend with you,
and I will save your children.
26
d I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh,
and they shall be drunk e with their own blood as with wine.
Then all flesh shall know
that f I am the LORD your Savior,
and your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.”
Israel’s Sin and the Servant’s Obedience