ISAIAH 57 [†] The righteous man perishes,
and no one lays it to heart;
r devout men are taken away,
while no one understands.
For the righteous man is taken away from calamity;
2 s he enters into peace;
they rest t in their beds
who walk in their uprightness.
3[†] But you, draw near,
sons of the sorceress,
u offspring of the adulterer and the loose woman.
4 Whom are you mocking?
Against whom v do you open your mouth wide
and stick out your tongue?
Are you not children of w transgression,
x the offspring of deceit,
5 you who burn with lust among y the oaks, [1]
under every green tree,
z who slaughter your children in the valleys,
under the clefts of the rocks?
6[†] Among the smooth stones of a the valley is your portion;
they, they, are your lot;
to them you have poured out a drink offering,
you have brought a grain offering.
Shall I relent for these things?
7[†] b On a high and lofty mountain
you have set your bed,
and there you went up to offer sacrifice.
8 Behind the door and the doorpost
you have set up your memorial;
for, deserting me, c you have uncovered your bed,
you have gone up to it,
d you have made it wide;
and you have made a covenant for yourself with them,
you have loved their bed,
you have looked on nakedness. [2]
9[†] You journeyed to the king with oil
and multiplied your perfumes;
e you sent your envoys far off,
and sent down even to Sheol.
10 You were wearied with the length of your way,
f but you did not say, “It is hopeless”;
you found new life for your strength,
and so you were not faint. [3]
11
g Whom did you dread and fear,
h so that you lied,
and did not remember me,
did not lay it to heart?
i Have I not held my peace, even for a long time,
and you do not fear me?
12[†] I will declare your righteousness and your deeds,
but they will not profit you.
13 j When you cry out, let your collection of idols deliver you!
The wind will carry them all off,
a breath will take them away.
k But he who takes refuge in me shall possess the land
and shall inherit l my holy mountain.
Comfort for the Contrite
14[†] And it shall be said,
m “Build up, build up, prepare the way,
remove every obstruction from my people’s way.”
15[†] For thus says n the One who is high and lifted up,
who inhabits eternity, whose name is o Holy:
p “I dwell in the high and holy place,
and also q with him who is of a contrite and lowly spirit,
r to revive the spirit of the lowly,
and to revive the heart of the contrite.
16[†] s For I will not contend forever,
nor will I always be angry;
for the spirit would grow faint before me,
and the breath of life that I made.
17 Because of the iniquity of his t unjust gain I was angry,
I struck him; I hid my face and was angry,
but he went on backsliding in the way of his own heart.
18 I have seen his ways, u but I will heal him;
I will lead him v and restore comfort to him and his mourners,
19 w creating x the fruit of the lips.
y Peace, peace, z to the far and to the near,” says the LORD,
u “and I will heal him.
20 a But the wicked are like the tossing sea;
for it cannot be quiet,
and its waters toss up mire and dirt.
21
b There is no peace,” says my God, “for the wicked.”
True and False Fasting
ISAIAH 58 “Cry aloud; do not hold back;
c lift up your voice like a trumpet;
d declare to my people their transgression,
to the house of Jacob their sins.
2[†] e Yet they seek me daily
and delight to know my ways,
as if they were a nation that did righteousness
and did not forsake the judgment of their God;
they ask of me righteous judgments;
they delight to draw near to God.
3
f ‘Why have we fasted, and you see it not?
Why have we humbled ourselves, and you take no knowledge of it?’
Behold, in the day of your fast you seek your own pleasure, [1]
g and oppress all your workers.
4 Behold, you fast only to quarrel and to fight
and to hit with a wicked fist.
Fasting like yours this day
will not make your voice to be heard on high.
5 h Is such the fast that I choose,
i a day for a person to humble himself?
Is it to bow down his head like a reed,
and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him?
Will you call this a fast,
and a day acceptable to the LORD?
6[†] “Is not this the fast that I choose:
j to loose the bonds of wickedness,
to undo the straps k of the yoke,
to let the oppressed [2] go free,
and to break every yoke?
7 Is it not l to share your bread with the hungry
and bring the homeless poor into your house;
when you see the naked, to cover him,
m and not to hide yourself from your own flesh?
8[†] n Then shall your light break forth like the dawn,
o and your healing shall spring up speedily;
p your righteousness shall go before you;
q the glory of the LORD shall be your rear guard.
9 Then you shall call, and the LORD will answer;
you shall cry, and he will say, ‘Here I am.’
If you take away r the yoke from your midst,
s the pointing of the finger, and speaking wickedness,
10[†] t if you pour yourself out for the hungry
and satisfy the desire of the afflicted,
n then shall your light rise in the darkness
and your gloom be as the noonday.
11 And the LORD will guide you continually
and satisfy your desire in scorched places
and make your bones strong;
and you shall be u like a watered garden,
like a spring of water,
whose waters do not fail.
12 v And your ancient ruins shall be rebuilt;
you shall raise up the foundations of many generations;
you shall be called the repairer of the breach,
the restorer of streets to dwell in.
13[†] w “If you turn back your foot from the Sabbath,
from doing your pleasure [3] on my holy day,
and call the Sabbath a delight
and the holy day of the LORD honorable;
if you honor it, not going your own ways,
or seeking x your own pleasure, [4] or talking idly; [5]
14 then you shall take delight in the LORD,
y and I will make you ride on the heights of the earth; [6]
z I will feed you with the heritage of Jacob your father,
a for the mouth of the LORD has spoken.”
Evil and Oppression
ISAIAH 59 Behold, b the LORD’s hand is not shortened, that it cannot
save,
or his ear dull, that it cannot hear;
2[†] c but your iniquities have made a separation
between you and your God,
and your sins have hidden his face from you
so that he does not hear.
3[†] d For your hands are defiled with blood
and your fingers with iniquity;
your lips have spoken lies;
your tongue mutters wickedness.
4 e No one enters suit justly;
no one goes to law honestly;
they rely on empty pleas, they speak lies,
f they conceive mischief and give birth to iniquity.
5 They hatch adders’ eggs;
they weave the spider’s web;
he who eats their eggs dies,
and from one that is crushed a viper is hatched.
6 g Their webs will not serve as clothing;
men will not cover themselves with what they make.
Their works are works of iniquity,
and deeds of violence are in their hands.
7 h Their feet run to evil,
and they are swift to shed innocent blood;
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity;
desolation and destruction are in their highways.
8 The way of peace they do not know,
and there is no justice in their paths;
they have made their roads crooked;
i no one who treads on them knows peace.
9[†] Therefore justice is far from us,
and righteousness does not overtake us;
j we hope for light, and behold, darkness,
and for brightness, but we walk in gloom.
10[†] k We grope for the wall like the blind;
we grope like those who have no eyes;
we stumble at noon as in the twilight,
l among those in full vigor we are like dead men.
11[†] We all growl like bears;
m we moan and moan like doves;
n we hope for justice, but there is none;
for salvation, but it is far from us.
12[†] For our transgressions are multiplied before you,
and our sins testify against us;
for our transgressions are with us,
and we know our iniquities:
13 transgressing, and denying the LORD,
and turning back from following our God,
o speaking oppression and revolt,
conceiving and uttering from the heart lying words.
Judgment and Redemption
14[†] p Justice is turned back,
and righteousness stands far away;
for truth has stumbled in the public squares,
and uprightness cannot enter.
15[†] Truth is lacking,
and he who departs from evil makes himself a prey.
The LORD saw it, and it displeased him [1]
that there was no justice.
16 q He saw that there was no man,
and wondered that there was no one to intercede;
then his own arm brought him salvation,
and his righteousness upheld him.
17
r He put on righteousness as a breastplate,
and a helmet of salvation on his head;
he put on garments of vengeance for clothing,
and wrapped himself in s zeal as a cloak.
18[†] t According to their deeds, so will he repay,
wrath to his adversaries, repayment to his enemies;
u to the coastlands he will render repayment.
19[†] v So they shall fear the name of the LORD from the west,
and his glory from the rising of the sun;
w for he will come like a rushing stream, [2]
which the wind of the LORD drives.
20[†] x “And y a Redeemer will come to Zion,
to those in Jacob who turn from transgression,” declares the LORD.
21[†]“And as for me, z this is my covenant with them,” says the LORD: “My
Spirit that is upon you, a and my words that I have put in your mouth, shall
not depart out of your mouth, or out of the mouth of your offspring, or out
of the mouth of your children’s offspring,” says the LORD, “from this time
forth and forevermore.”
The Future Glory of Israel