ISAIAH 44 [†] “But now hear, b O Jacob my servant,
Israel whom I have chosen!
2 Thus says the LORD who made you,
c who formed you from the womb and will help you:
d Fear not, O Jacob my servant,
e Jeshurun whom I have chosen.
3[†] f For I will pour water on the thirsty land,
and streams on the dry ground;
I will pour my Spirit upon your offspring,
and my blessing on your descendants.
4 They shall spring up among the grass
g like willows by flowing streams.
5[†] h This one will say, ‘I am the LORD’s,’
another will call on the name of Jacob,
and another will write on his hand, ‘The LORD’s,’
and name himself by the name of Israel.”
Besides Me There Is No God
6 Thus says the LORD, the King of Israel
and i his Redeemer, the LORD of hosts:
j “I am the first and I am the last;
besides me there is no god.
7 k Who is like me? Let him proclaim it. [1]
Let him declare and set it before me,
since I appointed an ancient people.
Let them declare what is to come, and what will happen.
8 Fear not, nor be afraid;
have I not told you from of old and declared it?
l And you are my witnesses!
m Is there a God besides me?
There is no n Rock; I know not any.”
The Folly of Idolatry
9[†] o All who fashion idols are nothing, and the things they delight in do
not profit. Their witnesses neither see nor know, that they may be put to
shame. 10 p Who fashions a god or casts an idol that is profitable for
nothing? 11
q Behold, all his companions shall be put to shame, and the
craftsmen are only human. Let them all assemble, let them stand forth. They
shall be terrified; they shall be put to shame together.
12[†] p The ironsmith takes a cutting tool and works it over the coals. He
fashions it with hammers and works it with his strong arm. He becomes
hungry, and his strength fails; he drinks no water and is faint. 13The
carpenter stretches a line; he marks it out with a pencil. He shapes it with
planes and marks it with a compass. r He shapes it into the figure of a man,
with the beauty of a man, to dwell in a house. 14[†] s He cuts down cedars,
or he chooses a cypress tree or an oak and lets it grow strong among the
trees of the forest. He plants a cedar and the rain nourishes it. 15Then it
becomes fuel for a man. He takes a part of it and warms himself; he kindles
a fire and bakes bread. Also he makes a god and worships it; he makes it an
idol and falls down before it. 16Half of it he burns in the fire. Over the half
he eats meat; he roasts it and is satisfied. Also he warms himself and says,
“Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire!” 17And the rest of it he makes into a
god, his idol, and falls down to it and worships it. t He prays to it and says,
“Deliver me, for you are my god!”
18[†]They know not, nor do they discern, for he has shut their eyes, so
that they cannot see, and their hearts, so that they cannot understand. 19No
one considers, nor is there knowledge or discernment to say, “Half of it I
burned in the fire; I also baked bread on its coals; I roasted meat and have
eaten. And shall I make the rest of it an u abomination? Shall I fall down
before a block of wood?” 20 v He feeds on w ashes; a deluded heart has led
him astray, and he cannot deliver himself or say, “Is there not x a lie in my
right hand?”
The LORD Redeems Israel
21[†] Remember these things, O Jacob,
and Israel, for you are y my servant;
I formed you; you are my servant;
z O Israel, you will not be forgotten by me.
22[†] a I have blotted out your transgressions like a cloud
and your sins like mist;
return to me, for I have redeemed you.
23[†] b Sing, O heavens, for the LORD has done it;
shout, O c depths of the earth;
break forth into singing, O mountains,
O forest, and every tree in it!
For the LORD has redeemed Jacob,
d and will be glorified [2] in Israel.
24[†] Thus says the LORD, e your Redeemer,
f who formed you from the womb:
g “I am the LORD, who made all things,
h who alone stretched out the heavens,
who spread out the earth by myself,
25 who frustrates the signs of liars
and makes fools of diviners,
i who turns wise men back
and makes their knowledge foolish,
26
j who confirms the word of his servant
and fulfills the counsel of his messengers,
who says of Jerusalem, ‘She shall be inhabited,’
k and of the cities of Judah, ‘They shall be built,
and I will raise up their ruins’;
27[†] l who says to the deep, ‘Be dry;
I will dry up your rivers’;
28[†] who says of m Cyrus, ‘He is n my shepherd,
and he shall fulfill all my purpose’;
saying of Jerusalem, ‘She shall be built,’
o and of the temple, ‘Your foundation shall be laid.’”
Cyrus, God’s Instrument