ISAIAH 3 [†] For behold, the s Lord GOD of hosts
is taking away from Jerusalem and from Judah
support and supply, [1]
all t support of bread,
and all support of water;
2[†] u the mighty man and the soldier,
the judge and the prophet,
the diviner and the elder,
3 the captain of fifty
and the man of rank,
the counselor and the skillful magician
and the expert in charms.
4 v And I will make boys their princes,
and infants [2] shall rule over them.
5 w And the people will oppress one another,
every one his fellow
and every one his neighbor;
the youth will be insolent to the elder,
and the despised to the honorable.
6[†] For x a man will take hold of his brother
in the house of his father, saying:
“You have a cloak;
you shall be our leader,
and this heap of ruins
shall be under your rule”;
7 in that day he will speak out, saying:
“I will not be a y healer; [3]
in my house there is neither bread nor cloak;
you shall not make me
leader of the people.”
8[†] For Jerusalem has stumbled,
and Judah has fallen,
because their z speech and their deeds are against the LORD,
a defying his glorious presence. [4]
9 For the look on their faces bears witness against them;
they proclaim their sin b like Sodom;
they do not hide it.
Woe to them!
c For they have brought evil on themselves.
10 d Tell the righteous that it shall be well with them,
e for they shall eat the fruit of their deeds.
11 f Woe to the wicked! It shall be ill with him,
for what his hands have dealt out shall be done to him.
12 My people— g infants are their oppressors,
and women rule over them.
O my people, h your guides mislead you
and they have swallowed up [5] the course of your paths.
13 The LORD i has taken his place to contend;
he stands to judge peoples.
14 The LORD will enter into judgment
with the j elders and princes of his people:
“It is you who k have devoured [6] the vineyard,
l the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
15 What do you mean by m crushing my people,
by grinding the face of the poor?”
declares the Lord GOD of hosts.
16 The LORD said:
n Because o the daughters of Zion are haughty
and walk with outstretched necks,
glancing wantonly with their eyes,
mincing along as they go,
p tinkling with their feet,
17 therefore the Lord q will strike with a scab
the heads of o the daughters of Zion,
and the LORD will lay bare their secret parts.
18In that day the Lord will take away r the finery of the anklets, the
s headbands, and the t crescents; 19the pendants, the bracelets, and the
scarves; 20the u headdresses, the armlets, the sashes, the perfume boxes, and
the amulets; 21the signet rings and v nose rings; 22the w festal robes, the
mantles, the cloaks, and the handbags; 23the mirrors, the linen garments, the
turbans, and the veils.
24[†] Instead of x perfume there will be rottenness;
and instead of a y belt, a rope;
and instead of z well-set hair, a baldness;
and instead of a rich robe, a b skirt of sackcloth;
and c branding instead of beauty.
25 Your men shall fall by the sword
and your mighty men in battle.
26 And d her gates shall lament and mourn;
empty, she shall e sit on the ground.
ISAIAH 4 f And seven women g shall take hold of f one man in that day,
saying, “We will eat our own bread and wear our own clothes, only let us be
called by your name; h take away our reproach.”
The Branch of the LORD Glorified
2[†]In that day i the branch of the LORD shall be beautiful and glorious, and
j the fruit of the land shall be the pride and honor of the survivors of Israel.
3[†] k And he who is left in Zion and remains in Jerusalem will be called
l holy, everyone who has m been recorded for life in Jerusalem, 4when n the
Lord shall have washed away the filth of o the daughters of Zion and
cleansed the bloodstains of Jerusalem from its midst by a spirit of judgment
and by p a spirit of burning. [1] 5[†]Then the LORD will create over the whole
site of Mount Zion and over her assemblies q a cloud by day, and smoke
and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for over all the glory there will be
r a canopy.
6 s There will be a t booth for shade by day from the heat, and
u for a refuge and a shelter from the storm and rain.
The Vineyard of the LORD Destroyed