ISAIAH 32 [†] Behold, o a king will reign in righteousness,
and princes will rule in justice.
2 p Each will be like a hiding place from the wind,
a shelter from the storm,
q like streams of water in a dry place,
like the shade of a great rock in a weary land.
3[†] r Then the eyes of those who see will not be closed,
and the ears of those who hear will give attention.
4 The heart of the hasty will understand and know,
s and the tongue of the stammerers will hasten to speak distinctly.
5
t The fool will no more be called noble,
nor the scoundrel said to be honorable.
6 For u the fool speaks folly,
and his heart is busy with iniquity,
to practice ungodliness,
to utter error concerning the LORD,
v to leave the craving of the hungry unsatisfied,
and to deprive the thirsty of drink.
7 As for the scoundrel— w his devices are evil;
he plans wicked schemes
to ruin the poor with lying words,
even when the plea of the needy is right.
8[†] But he who is noble plans noble things,
and on noble things he stands.
Complacent Women Warned of Disaster
9
x Rise up, you women y who are at ease, hear my voice;
you complacent daughters, give ear to my speech.
10[†] In little more than a year
you will shudder, you complacent women;
for the grape harvest fails,
the fruit harvest will not come.
11[†] Tremble, you women y who are at ease,
shudder, you complacent ones;
z strip, and make yourselves bare,
a and tie sackcloth around your waist.
12 b Beat your breasts for the pleasant fields,
for the fruitful vine,
13[†] c for the soil of my people
growing up in thorns and briers,
d yes, for all the joyous houses
in the exultant city.
14 For the palace is forsaken,
the populous city deserted;
the hill and the watchtower
will become dens forever,
e a joy of wild donkeys,
a pasture of flocks;
15[†] until f the Spirit is poured upon us from on high,
and g the wilderness becomes a fruitful field,
and the fruitful field is deemed a forest.
16 Then justice will dwell in the wilderness,
and righteousness abide in the fruitful field.
17 h And the effect of righteousness will be peace,
and the result of righteousness, quietness and trust [1] forever.
18 My people will abide in a peaceful habitation,
in secure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.
19[†] i And it will hail when the forest falls down,
j and the city will be utterly laid low.
20 k Happy are you who sow beside all waters,
who let the feet of the ox and the donkey range free.
O LORD, Be Gracious to Us