ISAIAH 48 [†] Hear this, O house of Jacob,
d who are called by the name of Israel,
and e who came from the waters of Judah,
f who swear by the name of the LORD
and confess the God of Israel,
but not in truth or right.
2[†] For they call themselves after the holy city,
g and stay themselves on the God of Israel;
the LORD of hosts is his name.
3 “The former things h I declared of old;
they went out from my mouth, and I announced them;
then suddenly I did them, and they came to pass.
4 Because I know that i you are obstinate,
and your neck is an iron sinew
and your forehead brass,
5 h I declared them to you from of old,
before they came to pass I announced them to you,
lest you should say, j ‘My idol did them,
my carved image and my metal image commanded them.’
6 “You have heard; now see all this;
and will you not declare it?
From this time forth k I announce to you new things,
hidden things that you have not known.
7 They are created now, not long ago;
before today you have never heard of them,
lest you should say, ‘Behold, I knew them.’
8 You have never heard, you have never known,
from of old your ear has not been opened.
For I knew that you would surely deal treacherously,
and that l from before birth you were called a rebel.
9[†] m “For my name’s sake I defer my anger,
for the sake of my praise I restrain it for you,
that I may not cut you off.
10 Behold, I have refined you, n but not as silver;
o I have tried [1] you in the furnace of affliction.
11 p For my own sake, for my own sake, I do it,
for how should my name [2] be profaned?
q My glory I will not give to another.
The LORD’s Call to Israel
12[†] “Listen to me, O Jacob,
and Israel, whom I called!
I am he; r I am the first,
and I am the last.
13 My hand s laid the foundation of the earth,
and my right hand s spread out the heavens;
t when I call to them,
they stand forth together.
14[†] “Assemble, all of you, and listen!
u Who among them has declared these things?
The LORD loves him;
v he shall perform his purpose on Babylon,
and his arm shall be against w the Chaldeans.
15 x I, even I, have spoken and called him;
I have brought him, and he will prosper in his way.
16[†] y Draw near to me, hear this:
from the beginning I have not spoken in secret,
from the time it came to be I have been there.”
And now z the Lord GOD has sent me, and his Spirit.
17[†] Thus says the LORD,
your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel:
“I am the LORD your God,
who teaches you to profit,
who leads you in the way you should go.
18 a Oh that you had paid attention to my commandments!
b Then your peace would have been like a river,
and your righteousness like the waves of the sea;
19 c your offspring would have been like the sand,
and your descendants like its grains;
their name would never be cut off
or destroyed from before me.”
20[†] d Go out from Babylon, flee from e Chaldea,
declare this f with a shout of joy, proclaim it,
send it out to the end of the earth;
say, g “The LORD has redeemed his servant Jacob!”
21 h They did not thirst when he led them through the deserts;
i he made water flow for them from the rock;
he split the rock and the water gushed out.
22 j “There is no peace,” says the LORD, “for the wicked.”
The Servant of the LORD