ISAIAH 36 [†] j In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, k Sennacherib king
of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and took them.
2[†] l And the king of Assyria sent the Rabshakeh [1] from m Lachish to King
Hezekiah at Jerusalem, with a great army. And he stood n by the conduit of
the upper pool on the highway to the Washer’s Field. 3And there came out
to him o Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and
o Shebna the secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, the recorder.
4[†]And the Rabshakeh said to them, “Say to Hezekiah, ‘Thus says the
p great king, the king of Assyria: On what do you rest this trust of yours?
5Do you think that mere words are strategy and power for war? In whom do
you now trust, that you have rebelled against me? 6 q Behold, you are
trusting in Egypt, that broken reed of a staff, which will pierce the hand of
any man who leans on it. Such is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust in
him. 7[†]But if you say to me, “We trust in the LORD our God,” is it not he
r whose high places and altars Hezekiah has removed, saying to Judah and
to Jerusalem, “You shall worship before this altar”? 8Come now, make a
wager with my master the king of Assyria: I will give you two thousand
horses, if you are able on your part to set riders on them. 9How then can you
repulse s a single captain among the least of my master’s servants, when
t you trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 10Moreover, is it without
the LORD that I have come up against this land to destroy it? u The LORD
said to me, Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
11Then Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah said to the Rabshakeh, “Please speak
to your servants v in Aramaic, for we understand it. Do not speak to us in
the language of Judah within the hearing of the people who are on the
wall.” 12But the Rabshakeh said, “Has my master sent me to speak these
words to your master and to you, and not to the men sitting on the wall,
who are doomed with you to eat their own dung and drink their own urine?”
13Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out in a loud voice in the
language of Judah: “Hear the words of the great king, the king of Assyria!
14[†]Thus says the king: w ‘Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not
be able to deliver you. 15[†]Do not let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD
by saying, “The LORD will surely deliver us. This city will not be given into
the hand of the king of Assyria.” 16Do not listen to Hezekiah. For thus says
the king of Assyria: Make your peace with me [2] and come out to me. Then
each one of you will eat of his own vine, and each one of his own fig tree,
and each one of you will drink the water of his own cistern, 17until x I come
and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and wine, a
land of bread and vineyards. 18[†]Beware lest Hezekiah mislead you by
saying, “The LORD will deliver us.” Has any of the gods of the nations
delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria? 19
y Where are the
gods of z Hamath and z Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? a Have
they delivered Samaria out of my hand? 20 b Who among all the gods of
these lands have delivered their lands out of my hand, that the LORD should
deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?’”
21But they were silent and answered him not a word, for the king’s
command was, “Do not answer him.” 22 c Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah,
who was over the household, and Shebna the secretary, and Joah the son of
Asaph, the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and told him
the words of the Rabshakeh.
Hezekiah Seeks Isaiah’s Help