JEREMIAH 14 [†]The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah concerning
y the drought:
2 z “Judah mourns,
and a her gates languish;
her people lament on the ground,
and b the cry of Jerusalem goes up.
3 Her nobles send their servants for water;
they come to the cisterns;
they find no water;
they return with their vessels empty;
they are c ashamed and confounded
and d cover their heads.
4 Because of the ground that is dismayed,
since there is e no rain on the land,
the farmers are ashamed;
they cover their heads.
5 Even f the doe in the field forsakes her newborn fawn
because there is no grass.
6 g The wild donkeys stand on the bare heights;
they pant for air like jackals;
their eyes fail
because there is no vegetation.
7[†] “Though our iniquities testify against us,
act, O LORD, h for your name’s sake;
i for our backslidings are many;
j we have sinned against you.
8[†] k O you hope of Israel,
its savior in time of trouble,
why should you be like a stranger in the land,
like a traveler who turns aside to tarry for a night?
9 Why should you be like a man confused,
l like a mighty warrior who cannot save?
Yet m you, O LORD, are in the midst of us,
and n we are called by your name;
o do not leave us.”
10[†] Thus says the LORD concerning this people:
“They have loved to wander thus;
they have not restrained their feet;
p therefore the LORD does not accept them;
q now he will remember their iniquity
and punish their sins.”
11The LORD said to me: r “Do not pray for the welfare of this people.
12Though they fast, I will not hear their cry, s and though they offer burnt
offering and grain offering, I will not accept them. But I will consume them
t by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence.”
Lying Prophets
13Then I said: “Ah, Lord GOD, behold, the prophets u say to them, ‘You
shall not see the sword, nor shall you have famine, but I will give you
assured peace in this place.’” 14And the LORD said to me: “The v prophets
are prophesying lies in my name. w I did not send them, nor did I command
them or speak to them. They are prophesying to you a lying vision,
x worthless divination, and y the deceit of their own minds. 15[†]Therefore
thus says the LORD concerning the prophets who prophesy in my name
although w I did not send them, and who say, t ‘Sword and famine shall not
come upon this land’: z By sword and famine those prophets shall be
consumed. 16And the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the
streets of Jerusalem, victims of famine and sword, a with none to bury them
—them, their wives, their sons, and their daughters. For I will pour out their
evil upon them.
17 “You shall say to them this word:
b ‘Let my eyes run down with tears night and day,
and let them not cease,
for the virgin c daughter of my people is shattered with a great wound,
d with a very grievous blow.
18 e If I go out into the field,
behold, those pierced by the sword!
e And if I enter the city,
behold, the diseases of famine!
f For both prophet and priest ply their trade through the land
and have no knowledge.’”
19[†] g Have you utterly rejected Judah?
Does your soul loathe Zion?
Why have you struck us down
h so that there is no healing for us?
i We looked for peace, but no good came;
i for a time of healing, but behold, terror.
20[†] j We acknowledge our wickedness, O LORD,
and the iniquity of our fathers,
j for we have sinned against you.
21 Do not spurn us, k for your name’s sake;
do not dishonor your glorious throne;
l remember and do not break your covenant with us.
22 Are there any among m the false gods of the nations n that can bring
rain?
Or can the heavens give showers?
Are you not he, O LORD our God?
We set our hope on you,
o for you do all these things.
The LORD Will Not Relent
JEREMIAH 15 Then the LORD said to me, p “Though q Moses r and Samuel
s stood before me, yet my heart would not turn toward this people. Send
them out of my sight, and let them go! 2[†]And when they ask you, ‘Where
shall we go?’ you shall say to them, ‘Thus says the LORD:
t “‘Those who are for pestilence, to pestilence,
and those who are for the sword, to the sword;
those who are for famine, to famine,
and those who are for captivity, to captivity.’
3
u I will appoint over them four kinds of destroyers, declares the LORD: the
sword to kill, the dogs to tear, and v the birds of the air w and the beasts of
the earth to devour and destroy.
4[†] x And I will make them a horror to all
the kingdoms of the earth because of what y Manasseh the son of Hezekiah,
king of Judah, did in Jerusalem.
5[†] z “Who will have pity on you, O Jerusalem,
z or who will grieve for you?
Who will turn aside
to ask about your welfare?
6[†] a You have rejected me, declares the LORD;
b you keep going backward,
so I have stretched out my hand against you and destroyed you—
c I am weary of relenting.
7[†] d I have winnowed them with e a winnowing fork
in the gates of the land;
I have bereaved them; I have destroyed my people;
f they did not turn from their ways.
8 I have made their widows more in number
than g the sand of the seas;
I have brought against the mothers of young men
a destroyer at noonday;
I have made anguish and terror
fall upon them suddenly.
9[†] h She who bore seven has grown feeble;
i she has fainted away;
j her sun went down while it was yet day;
she has been shamed and disgraced.
And the rest of them I will give to the sword
before their enemies,
declares the LORD.”
Jeremiah’s Complaint
10
k Woe is me, my mother, that you bore me, a man of strife and contention
to the whole land! l I have not lent, nor have I borrowed, yet all of them
curse me. 11The LORD said, “Have I not [1] set you free for their good? Have
I not pleaded for you before the enemy in the time of trouble and in the time
of distress? 12Can one break iron, iron m from the north, and bronze?
13[†] n “Your wealth and your treasures I will give as o spoil, without
price, for all your sins, throughout all your territory.
14I will make you serve
your enemies p in a land that you do not know, q for in my anger a fire is
kindled that shall burn forever.”
15[†] r O LORD, you know;
s remember me and visit me,
s t and take vengeance for me on my persecutors.
In your forbearance take me not away;
u know that v for your sake I bear reproach.
16[†] Your words were found, w and I ate them,
and x your words became to me a joy
and the delight of my heart,
y for I am called by your name,
O LORD, God of hosts.
17 z I did not sit in the company of revelers,
nor did I rejoice;
a I sat alone, because your hand was upon me,
for you had filled me with indignation.
18[†] Why is my pain unceasing,
b my wound incurable,
refusing to be healed?
Will you be to me c like a deceitful brook,
like waters that fail?
19[†] Therefore thus says the LORD:
d “If you return, I will restore you,
and you shall e stand before me.
If you utter what is precious, and not what is worthless,
you shall be as my mouth.
They shall turn to you,
but you shall not turn to them.
20[†] f And I will make you to this people
a fortified wall of bronze;
they will fight against you,
g but they shall not prevail over you,
h for I am with you
to save you and deliver you,
21 g I will deliver you out of the hand of the wicked,
and redeem you from the grasp of i the ruthless.”
declares the LORD.
Famine, Sword, and Death
JEREMIAH 16 The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†]“You shall not take a
wife, nor shall you have sons or daughters in this place. 3For thus says the
LORD concerning the sons and daughters who are born in this place, and
concerning the mothers who bore them and the fathers who fathered them
in this land: 4 j They shall die of deadly diseases. k They shall not be
lamented, nor shall they be buried. l They shall be as dung on the surface of
the ground. m They shall perish by the sword and by famine, n and their
dead bodies shall be food for the birds of the air and for the beasts of the
earth.
5[†]“For thus says the LORD: o Do not enter the house of mourning, or go
to lament or grieve for them, for I have taken away my peace from this
people, my steadfast love and mercy, declares the LORD.
6Both great and
small shall die in this land. k They shall not be buried, and no one shall
lament for them or p cut himself q or make himself bald for them. 7No one
shall r break bread for the mourner, to comfort him for the dead, nor shall
anyone give him the cup of consolation to drink for his father or his mother.
8You shall not go into the house of feasting to sit with them, to eat and
drink. 9For thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: s Behold, I will
silence in this place, before your eyes and in your days, the voice of mirth
and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the
bride.
10“And when you tell this people all these words, and they say to you,
t ‘Why has the LORD pronounced all this great evil against us? What is our
iniquity? What is the sin that we have committed against the LORD our
God?’ 11then you shall say to them: u ‘Because your fathers have forsaken
me, declares the LORD, and v have gone after other gods and have served
and worshiped them, and have forsaken me and have not kept my law,
12and because w you have done worse than your fathers, for behold, x every
one of you follows his stubborn, evil will, refusing to listen to me.
13[†]Therefore y I will hurl you out of this land into z a land that neither you
nor your fathers have known, a and there you shall serve other gods day and
night, for I will show you no favor.’
The LORD Will Restore Israel
14[†] b “Therefore, behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when it
shall no longer be said, c ‘As the LORD lives who brought up the people of
Israel out of the land of Egypt,’ 15but c ‘As the LORD lives who brought up
the people of Israel d out of the north country and out of all the countries
where he had driven them.’ For e I will bring them back to their own land
that I gave to their fathers.
16“Behold, f I am sending for many fishers, declares the LORD, and they
shall catch them. And afterward I will send for many hunters, and they shall
hunt them from every mountain and every hill, and out g of the clefts of the
rocks. 17For h my eyes are on all their ways. i They are not hidden from me,
i nor is their iniquity concealed from my eyes. 18But first j I will doubly
repay their iniquity and their sin, because they have polluted my land with
the carcasses of their detestable idols, and k have filled my inheritance with
their abominations.”
19[†] l O LORD, my strength and my stronghold,
m my refuge in the day of trouble,
n to you shall the nations come
from the ends of the earth and say:
“Our fathers have inherited nothing but lies,
o worthless things in which there is no profit.
20 Can man make for himself p gods?
Such are not gods!”
21“Therefore, behold, I will make them know, this once I will make them
know my power and my might, and they shall know that q my name is the
LORD.”
The Sin of Judah