JEREMIAH 9 [†] [1] m Oh that my head were waters,
and my eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night
for the slain of j the daughter of my people!
2[†] [2] Oh that I had in the desert
a travelers’ lodging place,
that I might leave my people
and go away from them!
For they are all n adulterers,
a company of o treacherous men.
3[†] p They bend their tongue like a bow;
falsehood and not truth has grown strong [3] in the land;
for they proceed from evil to evil,
q and they do not know me, declares the LORD.
4 r Let everyone beware of his neighbor,
and put no trust in any brother,
for every s brother is a deceiver,
and every neighbor t goes about as a slanderer.
5 Everyone deceives his neighbor,
and no one speaks the truth;
they have taught their tongue to speak lies;
they weary themselves committing iniquity.
6 Heaping oppression upon oppression, and deceit upon deceit,
u they refuse to know me, declares the LORD.
7 Therefore thus says the LORD of hosts:
“Behold, v I will refine them and w test them,
for what else can I do, j because of my people?
8 x Their tongue is a deadly arrow;
y it speaks deceitfully;
with his mouth z each speaks peace to his neighbor,
but in his heart a he plans an ambush for him.
9
b Shall I not punish them for these things? declares the LORD,
and shall I not avenge myself
on a nation such as this?
10 “I will take up weeping and wailing for the mountains,
and a lamentation for c the pastures of the wilderness,
d because they are laid waste so that no one passes through,
and the lowing of cattle is not heard;
e both the birds of the air and the beasts
have fled and are gone.
11 f I will make Jerusalem a heap of ruins,
g a lair of jackals,
h and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation,
without inhabitant.”
12[†] i Who is the man so wise that he can understand this? To whom has
the mouth of the LORD spoken, that he may declare it? Why is the land
ruined j and laid waste like a wilderness, so that no one passes through?
13And the LORD says: k “Because they have forsaken my law that I set
before them, and have not obeyed my voice or walked in accord with it,
14but l have stubbornly followed their own hearts and have gone after the
Baals, as their fathers taught them. 15[†]Therefore thus says the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel: m Behold, I will feed this people with bitter food,
and give them n poisonous water to drink. 16
o I will scatter them among the
nations p whom neither they nor their fathers have known, and I will q send
the sword after them, until I have consumed them.”
17 Thus says the LORD of hosts:
r “Consider, and call for the mourning women to come;
send for the skillful women to come;
18 let them make haste s and raise a wailing over us,
t that our eyes may run down with tears
and our eyelids flow with water.
19 For a sound of wailing is heard from Zion:
u ‘How we are ruined!
We are utterly shamed,
because we have left the land,
because they have cast down our dwellings.’”
20 Hear, O women, the word of the LORD,
and let your ear receive the word of his mouth;
teach to your daughters a lament,
and each to her neighbor a dirge.
21 For death has come up into our windows;
it has entered our palaces,
v cutting off the children from the streets
and the young men from the squares.
22 Speak: “Thus declares the LORD,
w ‘The dead bodies of men shall fall
like dung upon the open field,
x like sheaves after the reaper,
and none shall gather them.’”
23[†]Thus says the LORD: y “Let not the wise man boast in his wisdom, let
not the mighty man boast in his might, let not the rich man boast in his
riches, 24but z let him who boasts boast in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the LORD who practices steadfast love, justice, and
righteousness in the earth. a For in these things I delight, declares the
LORD.”
25[†]“Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when b I will
punish all those who are circumcised merely in the flesh— 26
c Egypt,
Judah, Edom, the sons of Ammon, Moab, and d all who dwell in the desert
who cut the corners of their hair, for all these nations are uncircumcised,
and all the house of Israel are e uncircumcised in heart.”
Idols and the Living God
JEREMIAH 10 Hear the word that the LORD speaks to you, O house of Israel.
2Thus says the LORD:
“Learn not the way of the nations,
nor be dismayed at the signs of the heavens
because the nations are dismayed at them,
3[†] f for the customs of the peoples are vanity. [1]
g A tree from the forest is cut down
and worked with an axe by the hands of a craftsman.
4 h They decorate it with silver and gold;
i they fasten it with hammer and nails
so that it cannot move.
5 Their idols [2] are like scarecrows in a cucumber field,
and j they cannot speak;
k they have to be carried,
for they cannot walk.
Do not be afraid of them,
l for they cannot do evil,
neither is it in them to do good.”
6 m There is none like you, O LORD;
you are great, and your name is great in might.
7
n Who would not fear you, O King of the nations?
For this is your due;
for among all the wise ones of the nations
and in all their kingdoms
there is none like you.
8[†] o They are both p stupid and foolish;
the instruction of idols is but wood!
9 q Beaten silver is brought from r Tarshish,
and gold from s Uphaz.
q They are the work of the craftsman and of the hands of the goldsmith;
their clothing is violet and purple;
t they are all the work of skilled men.
10 u But the LORD is the true God;
v he is the living God and the everlasting King.
At his wrath the earth quakes,
and the nations cannot endure his indignation.
11[†]Thus shall you say to them: w “The gods who did not make the
heavens and the earth x shall perish from the earth and from under the
heavens.” [3]
12 y It is he who z made the earth by his power,
z who established the world by his wisdom,
and a by his understanding stretched out the heavens.
13 b When he utters his voice, there is a tumult of waters in the heavens,
c and he makes the mist rise from the ends of the earth.
c He makes lightning d for the rain,
c and he brings forth the wind e from his storehouses.
14 f Every man is stupid and without knowledge;
g every goldsmith is put to shame by his idols,
for his images are false,
h and there is no breath in them.
15 They are worthless, a work of delusion;
at the time of their punishment they shall perish.
16 Not like these is he who is i the portion of Jacob,
for he is the one who formed all things,
j and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance;
k the LORD of hosts is his name.
17 l Gather up your bundle from the ground,
O you who dwell under siege!
18 For thus says the LORD:
m “Behold, I am slinging out the inhabitants of the land
at this time,
n and I will bring distress on them,
that they may feel it.”
19[†] Woe is me because of my hurt!
o My wound is grievous.
But I said, “Truly this is an affliction,
and I must bear it.”
20 p My tent is destroyed,
and all my cords are broken;
my children have gone from me,
q and they are not;
there is no one to spread my tent again
and p to set up my curtains.
21[†] r For the shepherds s are stupid
and do not inquire of the LORD;
therefore they have not prospered,
t and all their flock is scattered.
22 A voice, a rumor! Behold, it comes!—
u a great commotion out of the north country
to make v the cities of Judah a desolation,
v a lair of jackals.
23[†] w I know, O LORD, that the way of man is not in himself,
that it is not in man who walks to direct his steps.
24 x Correct me, O LORD, but in justice;
not in your anger, lest you bring me to nothing.
25
y Pour out your wrath on the nations that know you not,
and on the peoples that call not on your name,
z for they have devoured Jacob;
they have devoured him and consumed him,
and have laid waste his habitation.
The Broken Covenant