JEREMIAH 30 [†]The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2[†]“Thus
says the LORD, the God of Israel: e Write in a book all the words that I have
spoken to you. 3[†] f For behold, days are coming, declares the LORD,
g when I will restore h the fortunes of my people, i Israel and Judah, says
the LORD, j and I will bring them back to the land that I gave to their fathers,
and they shall take possession of it.”
4[†]These are the words that the LORD spoke concerning i Israel and
Judah:
5 “Thus says the LORD:
We have heard a cry of panic,
of terror, and no peace.
6 Ask now, and see,
can a man bear a child?
k Why then do I see every man
with his hands on his stomach k like a woman in labor?
l Why has every face turned pale?
7[†] Alas! m That day is so great
n there is none like it;
it is a time of distress for Jacob;
yet he shall be saved out of it.
8[†]“And it shall come to pass in that day, declares the LORD of hosts,
that I will o break his p yoke from off your neck, and I will o burst your
bonds, q and foreigners shall no more make a servant of him. [1] 9[†]But
they shall serve the LORD their God and r David their king, whom I will
raise up for them.
10
s “Then fear not, t O Jacob my servant, declares the LORD,
nor be dismayed, O Israel;
for behold, s I will save you from far away,
u and your offspring from the land of their captivity.
s Jacob shall return and have quiet and ease,
and none shall make him afraid.
11[†] v For I am with you to save you,
declares the LORD;
v I will make a full end of all the nations
among whom I scattered you,
but of you I will not make a full end.
v I will w discipline you in just measure,
and I will by no means leave you unpunished.
12 “For thus says the LORD:
x Your hurt is incurable,
y and your wound is grievous.
13 There is none to uphold your cause,
no medicine for your wound,
z no healing for you.
14[†] a All your lovers have forgotten you;
they care nothing for you;
for I have dealt you the blow of b an enemy,
the punishment c of a merciless foe,
because your guilt is great,
d because your sins are flagrant.
15 x Why do you cry out over your hurt?
x Your pain is incurable.
Because your guilt is great,
d because your sins are flagrant,
I have done these things to you.
16
e Therefore all who devour you shall be devoured,
and f all your foes, every one of them, shall go into captivity;
g those who plunder you shall be plundered,
h and all who prey on you I will make a prey.
17 i For I will restore j health to you,
and k your wounds I will heal,
declares the LORD,
because l they have called you an outcast:
l ‘It is Zion, for whom no one cares!’
18 “Thus says the LORD:
Behold, m I will restore the fortunes of the tents of Jacob
and have compassion on his dwellings;
the city shall be rebuilt on n its mound,
and the palace shall stand where it used to be.
19 o Out of them shall come songs of thanksgiving,
and the voices of those who celebrate.
p I will multiply them, and they shall not be few;
I will make them honored, and they shall not be small.
20[†] q Their children shall be as they were of old,
and their congregation shall be established before me,
and I will punish all who oppress them.
21 r Their prince shall be one of themselves;
r their ruler shall come out from their midst;
s I will make him draw near, and he shall approach me,
t for who would dare of himself to approach me?
declares the LORD.
22[†] u And you shall be my people,
and I will be your God.”
23 v Behold w the storm of the LORD!
Wrath has gone forth,
a whirling tempest;
it will burst upon the head of the wicked.
24[†] x The fierce anger of the LORD will not turn back
until he has executed and accomplished
the intentions of his mind.
y In the latter days you will understand this.
The LORD Will Turn Mourning to Joy