JEREMIAH 32 [†]The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD n in the
tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, o which was the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzar.
2[†]At that time the army of the king of Babylon was
besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet p was shut up in q the court
of the guard that was in the palace of the king of Judah. 3For Zedekiah king
of Judah had imprisoned him, saying, “Why do you prophesy and say,
‘Thus says the LORD: r Behold, I am giving this city into the hand of the
king of Babylon, and he shall capture it; 4 s Zedekiah king of Judah shall not
escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, r but shall surely be given into the
hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him face to face and see
him eye to eye. 5And t he shall take Zedekiah to Babylon, and there he shall
remain until I visit him, declares the LORD. u Though you fight against the
Chaldeans, you shall not succeed’?”
6[†]Jeremiah said, “The word of the LORD came to me: 7Behold,
Hanamel the son of Shallum your uncle will come to you and say, v ‘Buy
my field that is at w Anathoth, x for the right of redemption by purchase is
yours.’ 8Then Hanamel my cousin came to me in q the court of the guard, in
accordance with the word of the LORD, and said to me, ‘Buy my field that is
at w Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, for the right of possession and
redemption is yours; buy it for yourself.’ Then I knew that this was the
word of the LORD.
9[†]“And I bought the field at w Anathoth from Hanamel my cousin, and
y weighed out the money to him, seventeen shekels of silver.
10 z I signed the
deed, a sealed it, b got witnesses, and y weighed the money on scales.
11[†]Then I took the sealed deed of purchase, containing the terms and
conditions and the open copy.
12[†]And I gave the deed of purchase to
c Baruch the son of Neriah son of Mahseiah, in the presence of Hanamel my
cousin, in the presence of d the witnesses who signed the deed of purchase,
and in the presence of all the Judeans who were sitting in q the court of the
guard. 13[†]I charged c Baruch in their presence, saying, 14‘Thus says the
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: Take these deeds, both this sealed deed of
purchase and this open deed, and put them in an earthenware vessel, that
they may last for a long time. 15[†]For thus says the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel: Houses and e fields and vineyards shall again be bought in this
land.’
Jeremiah Prays for Understanding
16“After I had given the deed of purchase to f Baruch the son of Neriah, I
prayed to the LORD, saying: 17[†]‘Ah, Lord GOD! It is g you who have made
the heavens and the earth by your great power and by h your outstretched
arm! i Nothing is too hard for you. 18[†] j You show steadfast love to
thousands, j but you repay the guilt of fathers k to their children after them,
O great and l mighty God, whose name is the m LORD of hosts, 19
n great in
counsel and o mighty in deed, p whose eyes are open to all the ways of the
children of man, q rewarding each one according to his ways and according
to the fruit of his deeds. 20[†]You have shown r signs and wonders in the
land of Egypt, and to this day in Israel and among all mankind, s and have
made a name for yourself, as at this day.
21 t You brought your people Israel
out of the land of Egypt with signs and wonders, with a strong hand and
u outstretched arm, t and with great terror.
22And you gave them this land,
v which you swore to their fathers to give them, v a land flowing with milk
and honey.
23And they entered and took possession of it. w But they did not
obey your voice or walk in your law. They did nothing of all you
commanded them to do. Therefore you have made all this disaster come
upon them. 24[†]Behold, x the siege mounds have come up to the city to
take it, and y because of sword and famine and pestilence z the city is given
into the hands of the Chaldeans who are fighting against it. What you spoke
has come to pass, and behold, you see it. 25[†]Yet you, O Lord GOD, have
said to me, a “Buy the field for money b and get witnesses”—though z the
city is given into the hands of the Chaldeans.’”
26[†]The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah: 27“Behold, I am the LORD,
c the God of all flesh. d Is anything too hard for me? 28Therefore, thus says
the LORD: e Behold, I am giving this city into the hands of the Chaldeans
and into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and he shall capture
it. 29The Chaldeans who are fighting against this city f shall come and set
this city on fire and burn it, g with the houses on whose roofs offerings have
been made to Baal g and drink offerings have been poured out to other gods,
h to provoke me to anger.
30For the children of Israel and the children of
Judah have done nothing but evil in my sight i from their youth. The
children of Israel have done nothing but h provoke me to anger j by the
work of their hands, declares the LORD.
31This city has aroused my anger
and wrath, from the day it was built to this day, k so that I will remove it
from my sight 32because of all the evil of the children of Israel and the
children of Judah that they did to provoke me to anger— l their kings and
their officials, their priests and their prophets, the men of Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. 33
m They have turned to me their back and not
their face. And though I have taught them n persistently, they have not
listened o to receive instruction. 34They set up p their abominations in the
house that is called by my name, to defile it. 35They built the high places of
Baal q in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, r to offer up their sons and
daughters to Molech, s though I did not command them, nor did it enter into
my mind, that they should do p this abomination, t to cause Judah to sin.
They Shall Be My People; I Will Be Their God
36“Now therefore thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning this city
of which you say, u ‘It is given into the hand of the king of Babylon by
sword, by famine, and by pestilence’: 37[†] v Behold, I will gather them from
all the countries w to which I drove them in x my anger and my wrath and in
great indignation. I will bring them back to this place, y and I will make
them dwell in safety.
38[†] z And they shall be my people, and I will be their
God. 39[†] a I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me
forever, b for their own good and the good of their children after them.
40[†] c I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn
away from doing good to them. d And I will put the fear of me in their
hearts, that they may not turn from me. 41
e I will rejoice in doing them
good, f and I will plant them in this land in faithfulness, with all my heart
and all my soul.
42“For thus says the LORD: g Just as I have brought all this great disaster
upon this people, so I will bring upon them all the good that I promise them.
43 h Fields shall be bought in this land i of which you are saying, ‘It is a
desolation, without man or beast; j it is given into the hand of the
Chaldeans.’ 44[†]Fields shall be bought for money, and k deeds shall be
signed and k sealed and k witnessed, l in the land of Benjamin, l in the
places about Jerusalem, l and in the cities of Judah, l in the cities of the hill
country, l in the cities of the Shephelah, and in the cities of the Negeb; for
m I will restore their fortunes, declares the LORD.”
The LORD Promises Peace