JEREMIAH 27 [†]In the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah [1] the son of
Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the LORD.
2[†]Thus
the LORD said to me: c “Make yourself straps and d yoke-bars, and put them
on your neck. 3[†]Send word [2] to the king of e Edom, the king of e Moab,
the king of the sons of e Ammon, the king of e Tyre, and the king of Sidon
by the hand of the envoys who have come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of
Judah. 4Give them this charge for their masters: ‘Thus says the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel: This is what you shall say to your masters: 5“It is I
who f by my great power and my outstretched arm g have made the earth,
with the men and animals that are on the earth, h and I give it to whomever
it seems right to me. 6[†] i Now I have given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, j my servant, k and I have given him
also the beasts of the field to serve him. 7 l All the nations shall serve him
and m his son and n his grandson, o until the time of his own land comes.
p Then many nations and great kings shall make him their slave.
8[†]“‘“But if any nation or kingdom will not serve this Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon, q and put its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, I
will punish that nation r with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence,
declares the LORD, until I have consumed it by his hand. 9So s do not listen
to your t prophets, your diviners, your dreamers, your u fortune-tellers, or
your sorcerers, who are saying to you, ‘You shall not serve the king of
Babylon.’ 10
v For it is a lie that they are prophesying to you, with the result
that you will be removed far from your land, and I will drive you out, and
you will perish. 11 w But any nation that will bring its neck under the yoke of
the king of Babylon and serve him, I will leave on its own land, to work it
and dwell there, declares the LORD.”’”
12[†]To x Zedekiah king of Judah I spoke in like manner: w “Bring your
necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and y serve him and his
people and live. 13 z Why will you and your people die a by the sword, by
famine, and by pestilence, b as the LORD has spoken concerning any nation
that will not serve the king of Babylon? 14
c Do not listen to the words of the
prophets who are saying to you, ‘You shall not serve the king of Babylon,’
v for it is a lie that they are prophesying to you. 15I have not sent them,
declares the LORD, but v they are prophesying falsely in my name, with the
result that I will drive you out and you will perish, you and the prophets
who are prophesying to you.”
16Then I spoke to the priests and to all this people, saying, “Thus says the
LORD: c Do not listen to the words of your prophets who are prophesying to
you, saying, d ‘Behold, the vessels of the LORD’s house will now shortly be
brought back from Babylon,’ v for it is a lie that they are prophesying to
you. 17 c Do not listen to them; w serve the king of Babylon and live. Why
should this city e become a desolation? 18If they are prophets, and if the
word of the LORD is with them, then f let them intercede with the LORD of
hosts, g that the vessels that are left in the house of the LORD, in the house
of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem may not go to Babylon. 19[†] h For
thus says the LORD of hosts concerning the pillars, the sea, the stands, and
the rest of the vessels that are left in this city,
20which Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon did not take away, i when he took into exile from Jerusalem to
Babylon Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and all the nobles of
Judah and Jerusalem— 21[†]thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel,
h concerning the vessels that are left in the house of the LORD, in the house
of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem: 22 j They shall be carried to Babylon
k and remain there l until the day when I visit them, declares the LORD.
m Then I will bring them back j and restore them to this place.”
Hananiah the False Prophet