JEREMIAH 39 [†] n In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth
month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army came against
Jerusalem and besieged it. 2[†]In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the
fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the city.
3[†]Then all o the officials of the king of Babylon came p and sat in the
middle gate: Nergal-sar-ezer of Samgar, Nebu-sar-sekim q the Rab-saris,
Nergal-sar-ezer the Rab-mag, with all the rest of the officers of the king of
Babylon. 4[†]When Zedekiah king of Judah and all the soldiers saw them,
they fled, going out of the city at night by way of the king’s garden through
the gate between the two walls; and they went toward r the Arabah. 5[†]But
the army of the Chaldeans pursued them and overtook Zedekiah in s the
plains of Jericho. And when they had taken him, they brought him up to
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, at t Riblah, in the land of Hamath; u and
he passed sentence on him. 6[†]The king of Babylon v slaughtered the sons
of Zedekiah at t Riblah before his eyes, and the king of Babylon
v slaughtered all the nobles of Judah. 7 w He put out the eyes of Zedekiah
and bound him in chains to take him to Babylon. 8
x The Chaldeans burned
the king’s house and the house of the people, y and broke down the walls of
Jerusalem. 9[†]Then z Nebuzaradan, the a captain of the guard, carried into
exile to Babylon the rest of the people who were left in the city, b those who
had deserted to him, and the people who remained. 10Nebuzaradan, the
captain of the guard, c left in the land of Judah some of the poor people who
owned nothing, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.
The LORD Delivers Jeremiah
11[†]Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon gave command concerning Jeremiah
through Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, saying, 12 d “Take him, look
after him well, and do him no harm, but deal with him as he tells you.”
13[†]So e Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, Nebushazban the Rab-saris,
Nergal-sar-ezer the Rab-mag, e and all the chief officers of the king of
Babylon 14sent and took Jeremiah from f the court of the guard. They
entrusted him to g Gedaliah the son of h Ahikam, son of i Shaphan, that he
should take him home. So j he lived among the people.
15[†]The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah k while he was shut up in
the court of the guard: 16“Go, and say to l Ebed-melech the Ethiopian,
‘Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: m Behold, I will fulfill my
words against this city for harm and n not for good, and they shall be
accomplished before you on that day.
17[†]But I will deliver you on that
day, declares the LORD, and you shall not be given into the hand of the men
o of whom you are afraid. 18[†]For I will surely save you, and you shall not
fall by the sword, but you shall have your p life as a prize of war, q because
you have put your trust in me, declares the LORD.’”
Jeremiah Remains in Judah