JEREMIAH 21 [†]This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD,
when King Zedekiah sent to him u Pashhur the son of Malchiah and
v Zephaniah the priest, the son of w Maaseiah, saying, 2 x “Inquire of the
LORD for us, y for Nebuchadnezzar [1] king of Babylon is making war
against us. Perhaps the LORD will deal with us according to z all his
wonderful deeds and will make him withdraw from us.”
3[†]Then Jeremiah said to them: “Thus you shall say to Zedekiah, 4‘Thus
says the LORD, the God of Israel: a Behold, I will turn back the weapons of
war that are in your hands and with which you are fighting against the king
of Babylon and against the Chaldeans who are besieging you outside the
walls. b And I will bring them together into the midst of this city.
5I myself
will fight against you c with outstretched hand and strong arm, d in anger
and in fury and in great wrath. 6And I will strike down the inhabitants of
this city, both man and beast. They shall die of a great pestilence.
7Afterward, declares the LORD, e I will give Zedekiah king of Judah and his
servants and the people in this city who survive the pestilence, sword, and
famine into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and into the hand
of their enemies, into the hand of those who seek their lives. He shall strike
them down with the edge of the sword. f He shall not pity them or spare
them or have compassion.’
8[†]“And to this people you shall say: g ‘Thus says the LORD: Behold, h I
set before you the way of life and the way of death. 9He who stays in this
city shall die i by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, but he who goes
out and j surrenders to the Chaldeans who are besieging you shall live k and
shall have his life as a prize of war.
10For l I have set my face against this
city for harm and m not for good, declares the LORD: n it shall be given into
the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.’
Message to the House of David
11“And to the house of the king of Judah say, ‘Hear the word of the LORD,
12[†]O house of David! Thus says the LORD:
o “‘Execute justice p in the morning,
and deliver from the hand of the oppressor
him who has been robbed,
q lest my wrath go forth like fire,
and burn with none to quench it,
because of your evil deeds.’”
13 r “Behold, I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley,
O rock of the plain,
declares the LORD;
you who say, s ‘Who shall come down against us,
or who shall enter our habitations?’
14[†] t I will punish you according to u the fruit of your deeds,
declares the LORD;
v I will kindle a fire in her forest,
v and it shall devour all that is around her.”
JEREMIAH 22 Thus says the LORD: “Go down to the house of the king of
Judah and speak there this word, 2and say, w ‘Hear the word of the LORD, O
king of Judah, who sits on the throne of David, you, and your servants, and
your people who enter these gates. 3[†]Thus says the LORD: x Do justice and
righteousness, and deliver from the hand of the oppressor him who has been
robbed. And y do no wrong or violence z to the resident alien, x the
fatherless, and the widow, nor a shed innocent blood in this place. 4[†]For if
you will indeed obey this word, b then there shall enter the gates of this
house kings who sit on the throne of David, riding in chariots and on
horses, they and their servants and their people. 5But if you will not obey
these words, I c swear by myself, declares the LORD, that d this house shall
become a desolation. 6For thus says the LORD concerning the house of the
king of Judah:
“‘You are like Gilead to me,
like the summit of e Lebanon,
yet surely I will make you a desert,
f an uninhabited city. [1]
7[†] g I will prepare destroyers against you,
each with his weapons,
h and they shall cut down your choicest cedars
and cast them into the fire.
8“‘And many nations will pass by this city, and every man will say to his
neighbor, i “Why has the LORD dealt thus with this great city?” 9 j And they
will answer, “Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD their
God and worshiped other gods and served them.”’”
10
k Weep not for him who is dead,
nor grieve for him,
l but weep bitterly for him who goes away,
for he shall return no more
to see his native land.
Message to the Sons of Josiah
11[†]For thus says the LORD concerning Shallum the son of Josiah, king of
Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah his father, and m who went away from
this place: “He shall return here no more, 12but m in the place where they
have carried him captive, there shall he die, and he shall never see this land
again.”
13[†] n “Woe to him who builds his house by o unrighteousness,
and his upper rooms by injustice,
p who makes his neighbor serve him for nothing
and does not give him his wages,
14 who says, ‘I will build myself a great house
with spacious upper rooms,’
who cuts out windows for it,
paneling it with cedar
and q painting it with vermilion.
15 Do you think you are a king
because you compete in cedar?
Did not your father eat and drink
and r do justice and righteousness?
s Then it was well with him.
16 t He judged the cause of the poor and needy;
s then it was well.
Is not this u to know me?
declares the LORD.
17 But you have eyes and heart
only for your dishonest gain,
v for shedding innocent blood,
and for practicing oppression and violence.”
18Therefore thus says the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah,
king of Judah:
w “They shall not lament for him, saying,
x ‘Ah, my brother!’ or ‘Ah, sister!’
They shall not lament for him, saying,
y ‘Ah, lord!’ or ‘Ah, his majesty!’
19 With the burial of a donkey z he shall be buried,
dragged and dumped beyond the gates of Jerusalem.”
20 “Go up to Lebanon, and cry out,
and lift up your voice in Bashan;
cry out from a Abarim,
for all b your lovers are destroyed.
21 I spoke to you in your prosperity,
but you said, ‘I will not listen.’
c This has been your way from d your youth,
that you have not obeyed my voice.
22 e The wind shall shepherd all your shepherds,
and b your lovers shall go into captivity;
f then you will be ashamed and confounded
because of all your evil.
23 O inhabitant of g Lebanon,
nested among the cedars,
how you will be pitied when pangs come upon you,
h pain as of a woman in labor!”
24[†] i “As I live, declares the LORD, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim,
king of Judah, were j the signet ring on my right hand, yet I would tear you
off 25and k give you l into the hand of those who seek your life, into the
hand of those of whom you are afraid, even into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and into the hand of the Chaldeans. 26
m I
will hurl you and n the mother who bore you into another country, where
you were not born, and there you shall die. 27But to the land to which they
will long to return, there they shall not return.”
28 Is this man o Coniah a despised, broken pot,
a p vessel no one cares for?
Why are he and his children hurled and cast
into a q land that they do not know?
29[†] r O land, land, land,
hear the word of the LORD!
30 Thus says the LORD:
“Write this man down as s childless,
a man who shall not succeed in his days,
t for none of his offspring shall succeed
t in sitting on the throne of David
and ruling again in Judah.”
The Righteous Branch