JEREMIAH 11 [†]The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD:
2[†] a “Hear the words of this covenant, and speak to the men of Judah and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 3You shall say to them, Thus says the LORD,
the God of Israel: b Cursed be the man who does not hear the words of this
covenant 4[†]that I commanded your fathers when I brought them out of the
land of Egypt, c from the iron furnace, saying, d Listen to my voice, and do
all that I command you. d So shall you be my people, and I will be your
God, 5
e that I may confirm the oath that I swore to your fathers, f to give
them a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this day.” Then I answered,
“So be it, LORD.”
6And the LORD said to me, g “Proclaim all these words in the cities of
Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: h Hear the words of this covenant and
do them. 7For I solemnly warned your fathers when I brought them up out
of the land of Egypt, i warning them persistently, even to this day, saying,
d Obey my voice. 8 j Yet they did not obey or incline their ear, k but
everyone walked in the stubbornness of his evil heart. Therefore I brought
upon them all h the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do,
but they did not.”
9[†]Again the LORD said to me, l “A conspiracy exists among the men of
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 10[†]They have turned back to m the
iniquities of their forefathers, who refused to hear my words. m They have
gone after other gods to serve them. n The house of Israel and the house of
Judah have broken my covenant that I made with their fathers.
11[†]Therefore, thus says the LORD, Behold, I am bringing disaster upon
them that they cannot escape. o Though they cry to me, I will not listen to
them. 12Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem p will go
and cry to the gods to whom they make offerings, p but they cannot save
them in the time of their trouble. 13[†] p For your gods have become as many
as your cities, O Judah, and as many as the streets of Jerusalem are the
altars you have set up to shame, q altars to make offerings to Baal.
14[†]“Therefore r do not pray for this people, or lift up a cry or prayer on
their behalf, o for I will not listen when they call to me in the time of their
trouble. 15 s What right has my beloved in my house, t when she has done
many vile deeds? Can even sacrificial flesh avert your doom? u Can you
then exult? 16[†]The LORD once called you v ‘a green olive tree, beautiful
with good fruit.’ But w with the roar of a great tempest he will set fire to it,
and x its branches will be consumed. 17The LORD of hosts, y who planted
you, has decreed disaster against you, because of the evil that the house of
Israel and the house of Judah have done, z provoking me to anger by
making offerings to Baal.”
18[†] The LORD made it known to me and I knew;
then you showed me their deeds.
19 But I was a like a gentle lamb
led to the slaughter.
I did not know b it was against me
they devised schemes, saying,
“Let us destroy the tree with its fruit,
c let us cut him off from d the land of the living,
that his name be remembered no more.”
20 But, O LORD of hosts, who judges righteously,
who e tests f the heart and the mind,
g let me see your vengeance upon them,
for to you have I committed my cause.
21[†]Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the men of h Anathoth,
i who seek your life, and say, j “Do not prophesy in the name of the LORD,
or you will die by our hand”— 22[†]therefore thus says the LORD of hosts:
“Behold, I will punish them. The young men shall die by the sword, their
sons and their daughters shall die by famine, 23and none of them shall be
left. For I will bring disaster upon the men of k Anathoth, l the year of their
punishment.”
Jeremiah’s Complaint