JEREMIAH 12 [†] m Righteous are you, O LORD,
when I complain to you;
yet I would plead my case before you.
n Why does the way of the wicked prosper?
Why do all o who are treacherous thrive?
2[†] You plant them, and they take root;
they grow and produce fruit;
p you are near in their mouth
and far from their heart.
3[†] q But you, O LORD, know me;
r you see me, and test my heart toward you.
s Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter,
and set them apart for t the day of slaughter.
4
u How long will the land mourn
and the grass of every field wither?
v For the evil of those who dwell in it
w the beasts and the birds are swept away,
because they said, “He will not see our latter end.”
The LORD Answers Jeremiah
5[†] “If you have raced with men on foot, and they have wearied you,
how will you compete with horses?
And if in a safe land you are so trusting,
what will you do in x the thicket of the Jordan?
6 For y even your brothers and the house of your father,
o even they have dealt treacherously with you;
they are in full cry after you;
z do not believe them,
though they speak friendly words to you.”
7[†] “I have forsaken my house;
I have abandoned a my heritage;
I have given b the beloved of my soul
into the hands of her enemies.
8
a My heritage has become to me
like a lion in the forest;
she has lifted up her voice against me;
therefore I hate her.
9[†] Is a my heritage to me like c a hyena’s lair?
Are the c birds of prey against her all around?
Go, d assemble all the wild beasts;
bring them to devour.
10[†] Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard;
e they have trampled down my portion;
they have made my pleasant portion
a desolate wilderness.
11 They have made it a desolation;
desolate, u it mourns to me.
The whole land is made desolate,
f but no man lays it to heart.
12[†] Upon all the bare heights in the desert
destroyers have come,
for the sword of the LORD devours
from one end of the land to the other;
no flesh has peace.
13 g They have sown wheat and have reaped thorns;
h they have tired themselves out but profit nothing.
They shall be ashamed of their [1] harvests
i because of the fierce anger of the LORD.”
14Thus says the LORD concerning all j my evil neighbors k who touch the
heritage that l I have given my people Israel to inherit: “Behold, I will pluck
them up from their land, and I will pluck up the house of Judah from among
them. 15[†]And after I have plucked them up, I will again have compassion
on them, m and I will bring them again each to his heritage and each to his
land. 16[†]And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of
my people, n to swear by my name, ‘As the LORD lives,’ even as they taught
my people to swear by Baal, o then they shall be built up in the midst of my
people. 17 p But if any nation will not listen, then I will utterly pluck it up
and destroy it, declares the LORD.”
The Ruined Loincloth