JEREMIAH 6 [†] Flee for safety, z O people of Benjamin,
from the midst of Jerusalem!
Blow the trumpet in a Tekoa,
and raise a signal on b Beth-haccherem,
for disaster looms c out of the north,
and great destruction.
2 The lovely and delicately bred I will destroy,
d the daughter of Zion. [1]
3 e Shepherds with their flocks shall come against her;
f they shall pitch their tents around her;
they shall pasture, each in his place.
4[†] g “Prepare war against her;
arise, and let us attack h at noon!
Woe to us, for the day declines,
for the shadows of evening lengthen!
5 Arise, and let us attack by night
and destroy her palaces!”
6 For thus says the LORD of hosts:
i “Cut down her trees;
j cast up a siege mound against Jerusalem.
This is the city that must be k punished;
there is nothing but oppression within her.
7[†] l As a well keeps its water fresh,
so she keeps fresh her evil;
m violence and destruction are heard within her;
sickness and wounds are ever before me.
8 Be warned, O Jerusalem,
n lest I turn from you in disgust,
lest I make you o a desolation,
an uninhabited land.”
9[†] Thus says the LORD of hosts:
p “They shall glean thoroughly as a vine
the remnant of Israel;
like a grape gatherer pass your hand again
over its branches.”
10[†] q To whom shall I speak and give warning,
that they may hear?
r Behold, their ears are uncircumcised,
s they cannot listen;
behold, t the word of the LORD is to them an object of scorn;
they take no pleasure in it.
11[†] Therefore I am full of the wrath of the LORD;
u I am weary of holding it in.
v “Pour it out upon the children in the street,
and upon the gatherings of young men, also;
w both husband and wife x shall be taken,
the elderly and the very aged.
12
y Their houses shall be turned over to others,
their fields and wives together,
for I will stretch out my hand
against the inhabitants of the land,”
13[†] z “For from the least to the greatest of them,
everyone a is greedy for unjust gain;
and from b prophet to priest,
everyone deals falsely.
14 They have healed the wound of my people lightly,
saying, c ‘Peace, peace,’
d when there is no peace.
15 e Were they ashamed when they committed abomination?
No, they were not at all ashamed;
they did not know how to blush.
Therefore they shall fall among those who fall;
f at the time that I punish them, they shall be overthrown,”
declares the LORD.
says the LORD.
16[†] Thus says the LORD:
“Stand by the roads, and look,
and ask for g the ancient paths,
where the good way is; and walk in it,
h and find rest for your souls.
But they said, ‘We will not walk in it.’
17[†] i I set watchmen over you, saying,
‘Pay attention to j the sound of the trumpet!’
But they said, k ‘We will not pay attention.’
18[†] Therefore hear, O nations,
and know, O congregation, what will happen to them.
19 Hear, O earth; behold, I am bringing disaster upon this people,
l the fruit of their devices,
because they have not paid attention to my words;
and as for my law, they have rejected it.
20[†] m What use to me is n frankincense that comes from o Sheba,
or sweet cane from a distant land?
p Your burnt offerings are not acceptable,
nor your sacrifices pleasing to me.
21 Therefore thus says the LORD:
q ‘Behold, I will lay before this people
stumbling blocks against which they shall stumble;
fathers and sons together,
neighbor and friend shall perish.’”
22[†] Thus says the LORD:
r “Behold, a people is coming s from the north country,
a great nation is stirring from t the farthest parts of the earth.
23 They lay hold on bow and javelin;
they are u cruel and have no mercy;
v the sound of them is like the roaring sea;
they ride on horses,
set in array as a man for battle,
against you, O daughter of Zion!”
24 We have heard the report of it;
w our hands fall helpless;
anguish has taken hold of us,
x pain as of a woman in labor.
25[†] Go not out into the field,
nor walk on the road,
for the enemy has a sword;
y terror is on every side.
26[†] O daughter of my people, z put on sackcloth,
and a roll in ashes;
b make mourning as for an only son,
most bitter lamentation,
for suddenly the destroyer
will come upon us.
27[†] “I have made you c a tester of metals among my people,
that you may know and d test their ways.
28 e They are all stubbornly rebellious,
f going about with slanders;
they are g bronze and iron;
all of them act corruptly.
29 The g bellows blow fiercely;
the lead is consumed by the fire;
h in vain the refining goes on,
for the wicked are not removed.
30
i Rejected silver they are called,
for the LORD has rejected them.”
Evil in the Land