JEREMIAH 48 [†] x Concerning Moab.
Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel:
“Woe to y Nebo, for it is laid waste!
z Kiriathaim is put to shame, it is taken;
the fortress is put to shame a and broken down;
2[†] the renown of Moab is no more.
In b Heshbon they planned disaster against her:
‘Come, let us cut her off c from being a nation!’
You also, O d Madmen, shall be brought to silence;
the sword shall pursue you.
3[†] “A voice! A cry from e Horonaim,
‘Desolation and great destruction!’
4 Moab is destroyed;
her little ones have made a cry.
5[†] e For at the ascent of Luhith
they go up weeping; [1]
for e at the descent of Horonaim
they have heard the distressed cry [2] of destruction.
6 Flee! Save yourselves!
You will be like f a juniper in the desert!
7[†] For, g because you trusted in your works and your treasures,
you also shall be taken;
and h Chemosh i shall go into exile
with j his priests and his officials.
8[†] k The destroyer shall come upon every city,
and no city shall escape;
the valley shall perish,
and l the plain shall be destroyed,
as the LORD has spoken.
9 “Give wings to Moab,
for she would fly away;
her cities shall become a desolation,
with no inhabitant in them.
10[†] m “Cursed is he who does n the work of the LORD with slackness,
and cursed is he who keeps back his sword from bloodshed.
11[†] “Moab has been at ease from his youth
and has o settled on his dregs;
he has not been emptied from vessel to vessel,
nor has he gone into exile;
so his taste remains in him,
and his scent is not changed.
12[†]“Therefore, behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I
shall send to him pourers who will pour him, and empty his vessels and
break his [3] jars in pieces. 13[†]Then p Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh,
as q the house of Israel was ashamed of r Bethel, their confidence.
14 “How do you say, ‘We are heroes
and mighty men of war’?
15[†] The destroyer of s Moab and his cities has come up,
and the choicest of his young men have t gone down to slaughter,
declares u the King, u whose name is the LORD of hosts.
16[†] The calamity of Moab is near at hand,
and his affliction hastens swiftly.
17
v Grieve for him, all you who are around him,
and all who know his name;
say, w ‘How the mighty scepter is broken,
the glorious staff.’
18
x “Come down from your glory,
and sit on the parched ground,
O inhabitant of y Dibon!
For the destroyer of Moab has come up against you;
he has destroyed your strongholds.
19 z Stand by the way z and watch,
O inhabitant of a Aroer!
Ask him who flees and her who escapes;
say, ‘What has happened?’
20[†] Moab is put to shame, for it is broken;
v wail and cry!
Tell it beside b the Arnon,
that s Moab is laid waste.
21[†]“Judgment has come upon c the tableland, upon Holon, and
d Jahzah, and Mephaath, 22and y Dibon, and e Nebo, and Beth-diblathaim,
23and f Kiriathaim, and Beth-gamul, and g Beth-meon, 24and h Kerioth, and
i Bozrah, and all the cities of the land of Moab, far and near.
25 j The horn of
Moab is cut off, and k his arm is broken, declares the LORD.
26[†] l “Make him drunk, m because he magnified himself against the
LORD, so that Moab shall l wallow in his vomit, n and he too shall be held in
derision. 27
o Was not Israel a derision to you? p Was he found among
thieves, that whenever you spoke of him q you wagged your head?
28
r “Leave the cities, and dwell in the rock,
O inhabitants of Moab!
Be s like the dove that nests
in the sides of the mouth of a gorge.
29[†] t We have heard of the pride of Moab—
he is very proud—
of his loftiness, his pride, and his arrogance,
and the haughtiness of his heart.
30 I know his insolence, declares the LORD;
u his boasts are false,
his deeds are false.
31[†] v Therefore I wail for Moab;
I cry out for all Moab;
for the men of w Kir-hareseth I mourn.
32 More than for x Jazer I weep for you,
y O vine of z Sibmah!
a Your branches passed over the sea,
reached to the Sea of x Jazer;
on your summer fruits and your grapes
the destroyer has fallen.
33[†] b Gladness and joy have been taken away
from the fruitful land of Moab;
I have made the wine cease from the winepresses;
no one treads them with shouts of joy;
the shouting is not the shout of joy.
34 c “From the outcry at Heshbon even to Elealeh, as far as Jahaz they
utter their voice, from Zoar to d Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyah. For the
waters of Nimrim also have become desolate. 35[†]And I will bring to an
end in Moab, declares the LORD, him who offers sacrifice in e the high place
and makes offerings to his god. 36[†]Therefore my heart moans for Moab
like a flute, and my heart moans like a flute for the men of f Kir-hareseth.
g Therefore the riches they gained have perished.
37
h “For every head is shaved and every beard cut off. i On all the hands
are gashes, and j around the waist is sackcloth. 38On all the housetops of
Moab and in the squares there is nothing but lamentation, for I have broken
Moab like k a vessel for which no one cares, declares the LORD.
39How it is
broken! How they wail! l How Moab has turned his back in shame! So
Moab m has become a derision and a horror to all that are around him.”
40[†] For thus says the LORD:
“Behold, n one shall fly swiftly like an eagle
o and spread his wings against Moab;
41
p the cities shall be taken
and the strongholds seized.
q The heart of the warriors of Moab shall be in that day
like the heart of r a woman in her birth pains;
42[†] Moab shall be s destroyed and be no longer a people,
because t he magnified himself against the LORD.
43[†] u Terror, pit, and snare
are before you, O inhabitant of Moab!
44 He who flees from the terror
shall fall into the pit,
and he who climbs out of the pit
shall be caught in the snare.
v For I will bring these things upon Moab,
the year of their punishment,
declares the LORD.
declares the LORD.
45[†] “In the shadow of Heshbon
fugitives stop without strength,
for fire came out from Heshbon,
flame from the house of Sihon;
it has destroyed w the forehead of Moab,
the crown of w the sons of tumult.
46 x Woe to you, O Moab!
The people of y Chemosh are undone,
for your sons have been taken captive,
and your daughters into captivity.
47[†] z Yet I will restore the fortunes of Moab
in the latter days, declares the LORD.”
Thus far is the judgment on Moab.
Judgment on Ammon