JEREMIAH 7 [†]The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2 j “Stand in
the gate of the LORD’s house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear
the word of the LORD, all you men of Judah who enter these gates to
worship the LORD.
3[†]Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel:
k Amend your ways and your deeds, and I will let you dwell in this place.
4[†] l Do not trust in these deceptive words: ‘This is the temple of the LORD,
the temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD.’
5“For if you truly m amend your ways and your deeds, if you truly
n execute justice one with another,
6[†]if you n do not oppress the sojourner,
the fatherless, or the widow, m or shed innocent blood in this place, o and if
you do not go after other gods to your own harm, 7
p then I will let you
dwell in this place, q in the land that I gave of old to your fathers forever.
8“Behold, you trust in deceptive words to no avail. 9 r Will you steal,
murder, commit adultery, s swear falsely, t make offerings to Baal, o and go
after other gods that you have not known, 10[†]and then come and stand
before me in this house, u which is called by my name, and say, ‘We are
delivered!’—only to go on doing all these abominations? 11
v Has this house,
u which is called by my name, w become a den of robbers in your eyes?
Behold, I myself have seen it, declares the LORD.
12[†]Go now to x my place
that was in Shiloh, y where I made my name dwell at first, and z see what I
did to it because of the evil of my people Israel. 13And now, because you
have done all these things, declares the LORD, and a when I spoke to you
persistently you did not listen, and b when I called you, you did not answer,
14therefore I will do to c the house u that is called by my name, and in
which you trust, and to the place that I gave to you and to your fathers, z as
I did to Shiloh. 15[†] c And I will cast you out of my sight, d as I cast out all
your kinsmen, all the offspring of e Ephraim.
16[†]“As for you, f do not pray for this people, or lift up a cry or prayer
for them, and do not intercede with me, for I will not hear you. 17Do you
not see what they are doing in the cities of Judah and in the streets of
Jerusalem? 18The children gather wood, the fathers kindle fire, g and the
women knead dough, to h make cakes for i the queen of heaven. And j they
pour out drink offerings to other gods, k to provoke me to anger.
19
l Is it I
whom they provoke? declares the LORD. Is it not themselves, m to their own
shame? 20Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, n my anger and my
wrath will be poured out on this place, upon man and beast, upon the trees
of the field and the fruit of the ground; o it will burn and not be quenched.”
21Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: p “Add your burnt
offerings to your sacrifices, and eat the flesh. 22[†]For in the day that I
brought them out of the land of Egypt, I did not speak to your fathers or
command them q concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. 23But this
command I gave them: r ‘Obey my voice, and s I will be your God, and you
shall be my people. t And walk in all the way that I command you, u that it
may be well with you.’ 24
v But they did not obey or incline their ear, w but
walked in their own counsels and x the stubbornness of their evil hearts, and
y went backward and not forward. 25[†]From the day that your fathers came
out of the land of Egypt to this day, z I have persistently sent all my servants
the prophets to them, day after day.
26 v Yet they did not listen to me or
incline their ear, a but stiffened their neck. b They did worse than their
fathers.
27
c “So you shall speak all these words to them, but they will not listen to
you. d You shall call to them, but they will not answer you. 28And you shall
say to them, ‘This is the nation that did not obey the voice of the LORD their
God, and did not accept discipline; e truth has perished; it is cut off from
their lips.
29[†] f “‘Cut off your hair and cast it away;
raise a lamentation on g the bare heights,
for the LORD has rejected and forsaken
the generation of his wrath.’
The Valley of Slaughter
30“For the sons of Judah have done evil in my sight, declares the LORD.
They have set h their detestable things in the house i that is called by my
name, to h defile it. 31[†]And they have built the high places of j Topheth,
which is in k the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, l to burn their sons and their
daughters in the fire, m which I did not command, nor did it come into my
mind. 32[†] n Therefore, behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD,
when it will no more be called j Topheth, or k the Valley of the Son of
Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter; o for they will bury in Topheth,
because there is no room elsewhere. 33 p And the dead bodies of this people
will be food for the birds of the air, and for the beasts of the earth, q and
none will frighten them away.
34[†] r And I will silence in the cities of Judah
and in the streets of Jerusalem the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness,
the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, s for the land shall
become a waste.