JEREMIAH 40 [†]The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD r after
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from s Ramah, when
he took him t bound in chains along with all the captives of Jerusalem and
Judah who were being exiled to Babylon. 2[†]The captain of the guard took
Jeremiah and said to him, u “The LORD your God pronounced this disaster
against this place. 3The LORD has brought it about, and has done as he said.
v Because you sinned against the LORD and did not obey his voice, this
thing has come upon you. 4Now, behold, I release you today from t the
chains on your hands. w If it seems good to you to come with me to
Babylon, come, and I will look after you well, w but if it seems wrong to
you to come with me to Babylon, do not come. x See, the whole land is
before you; go wherever you think it good and right to go. 5If you
remain, [1] then return to y Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan,
z whom the king of Babylon appointed governor of the cities of Judah, and
dwell with him among the people. Or go wherever you think it right to go.”
So the captain of the guard gave him an allowance of food and a present,
and let him go. 6[†]Then Jeremiah went to y Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, at
a Mizpah, and lived with him b among the people c who were left in the
land.
7
d When all the captains of the forces in the open country and their men
heard that e the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
governor in the land and had committed to him men, women, and children,
those of f the poorest of the land who had not been taken into exile to
Babylon, 8they went to Gedaliah at a Mizpah— g Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah, h Johanan the son of Kareah, Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, the
sons of Ephai the Netophathite, i Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they
and their men. 9[†]Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, swore to
them and their men, saying, “Do not be afraid to serve the Chaldeans.
Dwell in the land and serve the king of Babylon, j and it shall be well with
you. 10As for me, I will dwell at a Mizpah, to represent you before the
Chaldeans who will come to us. But as for you, l gather wine and summer
fruits and oil, and store them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that
you have taken.” 11Likewise, when all the Judeans who were in m Moab and
among n the Ammonites and in o Edom and in other lands heard that the
king of Babylon had left a remnant in Judah and had appointed Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, as governor over them, 12 p then all the
Judeans returned from all the places to which they had been driven and
came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah at Mizpah. And they q gathered wine
and summer fruits in great abundance.
13[†]Now r Johanan the son of Kareah and s all the leaders of the forces
in the open country came to Gedaliah at Mizpah 14and said to him, “Do you
know that Baalis the king of t the Ammonites has sent Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah to take your life?” But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam would not
believe them. 15Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke secretly to Gedaliah
at Mizpah, “Please let me go and strike down Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,
and no one will know it. Why should he take your life, so that all the
Judeans who are gathered about you would be scattered, u and the remnant
of Judah would perish?” 16But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said to Johanan
the son of Kareah, “You shall not do this thing, for you are speaking falsely
of Ishmael.”
Gedaliah Murdered