JOB 12 [†]Then Job answered and said:
2[†] “No doubt you are the people,
and wisdom will die with you.
3 But I have b understanding as well as you;
I am not inferior to you.
Who does not know c such things as these?
4[†] I am d a laughingstock to my friends;
I, who e called to God and he answered me,
a just and blameless man, am a laughingstock.
5 In the thought of one who is f at ease there is contempt for misfortune;
it is ready for those whose feet slip.
6[†] g The tents of robbers are at peace,
and those who provoke God are secure,
who bring their god in their hand. [1]
7[†] “But ask the beasts, and they will teach you;
the birds of the heavens, and they will tell you;
8 or the bushes of the earth, [2] and they will teach you;
and the fish of the sea will declare to you.
9 Who among all these does not know
that h the hand of the LORD has done this?
10 In i his hand is the life of every living thing
and the breath of all mankind.
11 Does not j the ear test words
as the palate tastes food?
12 Wisdom is with k the aged,
and understanding in length of days.
13[†] l “With God [3] are wisdom and might;
he has counsel and understanding.
14 If he tears down, none can rebuild;
if he m shuts a man in, none can open.
15 If he n withholds the waters, they dry up;
if he o sends them out, they overwhelm the land.
16 With him are strength and p sound wisdom;
the deceived and the deceiver are his.
17 He leads q counselors away stripped,
and r judges he makes fools.
18[†] He s looses the bonds of kings
and binds a waistcloth on their hips.
19 He leads priests away stripped
and overthrows the mighty.
20 He deprives of speech those who are trusted
t and takes away the discernment of the elders.
21[†] He u pours contempt on princes
and loosens the belt of the strong.
22 He v uncovers the deeps out of darkness
and brings w deep darkness to light.
23 He x makes nations great, and he destroys them;
he enlarges nations, and y leads them away.
24 He takes away understanding from the chiefs of the people of the
earth
and z makes them wander in a trackless waste.
25 They a grope in the dark without light,
and he makes them b stagger like a drunken man.
Job Continues: Still I Will Hope in God
JOB 13 “Behold, my eye has seen all this,
my ear has heard and understood it.
2 c What you know, I also know;
I am not inferior to you.
3[†] d But I would speak to the Almighty,
and I desire to e argue my case with God.
4[†] As for you, f you whitewash with lies;
g worthless physicians are you all.
5 Oh that you would h keep silent,
and it would be your wisdom!
6[†] Hear now my argument
and listen to the pleadings of my lips.
7 Will you i speak falsely for God
and speak i deceitfully for him?
8 Will you show partiality toward him?
Will you j plead the case for God?
9 Will it be well with you when he k searches you out?
Or l can you deceive him, as one deceives a man?
10 He will surely rebuke you
if in secret you show partiality.
11[†] Will not his m majesty terrify you,
and the dread of him fall upon you?
12 Your maxims are proverbs of n ashes;
your defenses are defenses of clay.
13 “Let me have silence, and I will speak,
and let come on me what may.
14 Why should I take my flesh in my teeth
and o put my life in my hand?
15
p Though he slay me, I will q hope in him; [1]
yet I will r argue my ways to his face.
16[†] This will be my salvation,
that the godless shall not come before him.
17
s Keep listening to my words,
and let my declaration be in your ears.
18 Behold, I have t prepared my case;
I know that I shall be in the right.
19
u Who is there who will contend with me?
For then I would be silent and die.
20[†] Only grant me two things,
then I will not v hide myself from your face:
21
w withdraw your hand far from me,
and let not x dread of you terrify me.
22 y Then call, and I will answer;
or let me speak, and you reply to me.
23 How many are my iniquities and my sins?
z Make me know my transgression and my sin.
24 Why a do you hide your face
and b count me as your enemy?
25 Will you frighten c a driven leaf
and pursue dry d chaff?
26 For you e write bitter things against me
and make me inherit f the iniquities of my youth.
27[†] You put my feet in g the stocks
and h watch all my paths;
you set a limit for [2] the soles of my feet.
28[†] Man [3] wastes away like i a rotten thing,
like a garment that is j moth-eaten.
Job Continues: Death Comes Soon to All
JOB 14 “Man who is k born of a woman
is l few of days and m full of trouble.
2 He comes out like n a flower and o withers;
he flees like p a shadow and continues not.
3 And do you q open your eyes on such a one
and r bring me into judgment with you?
4[†] Who can bring s a clean thing out of an unclean?
There is not one.
5 Since his t days are determined,
and u the number of his months is with you,
and you have appointed his limits that he cannot pass,
6
v look away from him and leave him alone, [1]
that he may enjoy, like w a hired hand, his day.
7[†] “For there is hope for a tree,
if it be cut down, that it will sprout again,
and that its shoots will not cease.
8 Though its root grow old in the earth,
and x its stump die in the soil,
9 yet at the scent of water it will bud
and put out y branches like a young plant.
10 But a man dies and is laid low;
man breathes his last, and z where is he?
11 a As waters fail from a lake
and a river wastes away and dries up,
12 so a man lies down and rises not again;
till b the heavens are no more he will not awake
or be c roused out of his sleep.
13 Oh that you would d hide me in e Sheol,
that you would d conceal me f until your wrath be past,
that you would appoint me a set time, and remember me!
14 If a man dies, shall he live again?
All the days of my g service I would h wait,
till my renewal [2] should come.
15[†] You would i call, and I would answer you;
you would long for the j work of your hands.
16 For then you would k number my steps;
you would not keep l watch over my sin;
17 my transgression would be m sealed up in a bag,
and you would cover over my iniquity.
18 “But the mountain falls and n crumbles away,
and o the rock is removed from its place;
19 the waters wear away the stones;
the torrents wash away the soil of the earth;
so you destroy the hope of man.
20 You prevail forever against him, and he passes;
you change his countenance, and send him away.
21 His sons come to honor, and he p does not know it;
they are brought low, and he perceives it not.
22 He feels only the pain of his own body,
and he mourns only for himself.”
Eliphaz Accuses: Job Does Not Fear God