JOB 26 [†]Then Job answered and said:
2[†] “How you have x helped him who has no power!
How you have saved y the arm that has no strength!
3 How you have z counseled him who has no wisdom,
and plentifully declared sound knowledge!
4[†] With whose help have you uttered words,
and whose breath a has come out from you?
5[†] The b dead tremble
under the waters and their inhabitants.
6 Sheol is c naked before God, [1]
and d Abaddon has no covering.
7 He e stretches out the north over f the void
and hangs the earth on nothing.
8 He g binds up the waters in his thick clouds,
and the cloud is not split open under them.
9 He covers the face of the full moon [2]
and h spreads over it his cloud.
10 He has inscribed i a circle on the face of the waters
at the boundary between light and darkness.
11[†] j The pillars of heaven tremble
and are astounded at his k rebuke.
12 By his power he l stilled the sea;
by his understanding he shattered m Rahab.
13 n By his wind the heavens were made fair;
his hand pierced o the fleeing serpent.
14 Behold, these are but the outskirts of his p ways,
and how small q a whisper do we hear of him!
But the thunder of his power who can understand?”
Job Continues: I Will Maintain My Integrity
JOB 27 And Job again r took up his discourse, and said:
2 “As God lives, who has s taken away my right,
and the Almighty, who has t made my soul bitter,
3 as long as my breath is in me,
and u the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
4 my lips will not speak v falsehood,
and my tongue will not utter v deceit.
5 Far be it from me to say that you are right;
till I die I will not put away my w integrity from me.
6[†] I x hold fast my righteousness and will not let it go;
my heart does not y reproach me for any of my days.
7[†] “Let my enemy be as the wicked,
and let him who rises up against me be as the unrighteous.
8 z For what is the hope of the godless a when God cuts him off,
when God takes away his life?
9 b Will God hear his cry
when distress comes upon him?
10 Will he c take delight in the Almighty?
Will he call upon God at all times?
11[†] I will teach you concerning the hand of God;
d what is with the Almighty I will not conceal.
12 Behold, all of you have seen it yourselves;
why then have you become altogether vain?
13[†] e “This is the portion of a wicked man with God,
and the heritage that f oppressors receive from the Almighty:
14 If his g children are multiplied, it is for h the sword,
and his descendants have not enough bread.
15 Those who survive him the pestilence buries,
and his i widows do not weep.
16 Though he j heap up silver like dust,
and pile up clothing like clay,
17 he may pile it up, but the righteous will wear it,
and k the innocent will divide the silver.
18 He builds his l house like a moth’s,
like m a booth that n a watchman makes.
19 He goes to bed rich, but will o do so no more;
he opens his eyes, and p his wealth is gone.
20 q Terrors overtake him like r a flood;
in the night a whirlwind s carries him off.
21 t The east wind lifts him up and he is gone;
it u sweeps him out of his place.
22 It [1] hurls at him v without pity;
he flees from its [2] power in headlong flight.
23 It w claps its hands at him
and x hisses at him from its place.
Job Continues: Where Is Wisdom?