JOB 3 [†]After this Job h opened his mouth and cursed the day of his birth.
2And Job said:
3[†] i “Let the day perish on which I was born,
and the night that said,
‘A man is conceived.’
4 Let that day be darkness!
May God above not seek it,
nor light shine upon it.
5 Let gloom and j deep darkness claim it.
Let clouds dwell upon it;
let the blackness of the day terrify it.
6 That night—let thick darkness seize it!
Let it not rejoice among the days of the year;
let it not come into the number of the months.
7 Behold, let that night be barren;
let no joyful cry enter it.
8[†] Let those curse it who curse the day,
who are ready to rouse up k Leviathan.
9 Let the stars of its dawn be dark;
let it hope for light, but have none,
nor see l the eyelids of the morning,
10 because it did not shut the doors of my mother’s womb,
nor hide trouble from my eyes.
11 “Why m did I not die at birth,
come out from the womb and expire?
12 Why did n the knees receive me?
Or why the breasts, that I should nurse?
13[†] For then I would have lain down and been quiet;
I would have slept; then I would have been at rest,
14 with kings and counselors of the earth
who o rebuilt ruins for themselves,
15 or with princes who had gold,
who filled their houses with silver.
16 Or why was I not as a hidden p stillborn child,
as infants who never see the light?
17 There the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary are at q rest.
18 There the prisoners are at ease together;
they hear not the voice of r the taskmaster.
19 The small and the great are there,
and the slave is free from his master.
20[†] “Why is light given to him who is in misery,
and life to s the bitter in soul,
21 who t long for death, but it comes not,
and dig for it more than for u hidden treasures,
22 who rejoice exceedingly
and are glad when they find the grave?
23[†] Why is light given to a man whose v way is hidden,
whom God has w hedged in?
24 For my sighing comes x instead of [1] my bread,
and my y groanings are poured out like water.
25 z For the thing that I fear comes upon me,
and what I dread befalls me.
26 I am not at ease, nor am I quiet;
I have no rest, but trouble comes.”
Eliphaz Speaks: The Innocent Prosper