JOB 10 [†] “I u loathe my life;
I will give free utterance to my v complaint;
I will speak in w the bitterness of my soul.
2 I will say to God, Do not x condemn me;
let me know why you y contend against me.
3[†] z Does it seem good to you to oppress,
to despise a the work of your hands
b and favor the designs of the wicked?
4 Have you c eyes of flesh?
d Do you see as man sees?
5 Are your days as the days of man,
or your e years as a man’s years,
6 that you f seek out my iniquity
and search for my sin,
7 although you g know that I am not guilty,
and there is h none to deliver out of your hand?
8[†] i Your hands fashioned and made me,
and now you have destroyed me altogether.
9 Remember that you have made me like j clay;
and will you return me to the k dust?
10 Did you not pour me out like milk
and curdle me like cheese?
11 You clothed me with skin and flesh,
and knit me together with bones and sinews.
12 You have granted me life and steadfast love,
and your care has preserved my spirit.
13 Yet these things you hid in your heart;
I know that l this was your purpose.
14 If I sin, you m watch me
and do not n acquit me of my iniquity.
15[†] o If I am guilty, woe to me!
If I am p in the right, I cannot lift up my head,
for I am filled with disgrace
and q look on my affliction.
16 And were my head lifted up, [1] you would hunt me like r a lion
and again work s wonders against me.
17 You renew your t witnesses against me
and increase your vexation toward me;
you u bring fresh troops against me.
18 v “Why did you bring me out from the womb?
Would that I had died before any eye had seen me
19
w and were as though I had not been,
carried from the womb to the grave.
20 x Are not my days few?
y Then cease, and leave me alone, z that I may find a little cheer
21[†] before I go—and a I shall not return—
to the land of b darkness and c deep shadow,
22 the land of gloom like thick darkness,
like deep shadow without any order,
where light is as thick darkness.”
Zophar Speaks: You Deserve Worse