JOB 33 [†] “But now, hear my speech, O Job,
and listen to all my words.
2[†] Behold, I j open my mouth;
the tongue in my mouth speaks.
3 My words declare the uprightness of my heart,
and what my lips know they speak sincerely.
4 k The Spirit of God has made me,
and l the breath of the Almighty gives me life.
5
m Answer me, if you can;
n set your words in order before me; take your stand.
6 Behold, I am toward God as you are;
I too was pinched off from a piece of o clay.
7 Behold, no p fear of me need terrify you;
my q pressure will not be heavy upon you.
8 “Surely you have spoken in my ears,
and I have heard the sound of your words.
9[†] You say, ‘I am r pure, without s transgression;
I am clean, and there is no iniquity in me.
10 Behold, he finds occasions against me,
he t counts me as his enemy,
11[†] he u puts my feet in the stocks
and v watches all my paths.’
12 “Behold, in this you are not right. I will answer you,
for God is greater than man.
13 Why do you w contend against him,
saying, ‘He x will answer none of man’s [1] words’? [2]
14[†] For God y speaks in one way,
z and in two, though man a does not perceive it.
15 In b a dream, in c a vision of d the night,
when c deep sleep falls on men,
while they slumber on their beds,
16 then he e opens the ears of men
and terrifies them with warnings,
17 that he may turn man aside from his f deed
and conceal pride from a man;
18[†] he keeps back his soul from the pit,
his life from g perishing by the sword.
19[†] “Man is also rebuked with pain on his bed
and with continual strife in his h bones,
20 so that his i life loathes bread,
and his appetite j the choicest food.
21 His flesh is so wasted away that it cannot be seen,
and his bones that were not seen k stick out.
22 His soul draws near l the pit,
and his life to m those who bring death.
23[†] If there be for him n an angel,
o a mediator, p one of the thousand,
to declare to man what is q right for him,
24 and he is merciful to him, and says,
‘Deliver him from going down into the pit;
I have found r a ransom;
25 let his flesh s become fresh with youth;
let him return to the days of his youthful vigor’;
26 then man [3] t prays to God, and he accepts him;
he u sees his face with a shout of joy,
and he v restores to man his righteousness.
27 He sings before men and says:
‘I w sinned and perverted what was right,
and it was not repaid to me.
28 He has redeemed my x soul from going down y into the pit,
and my life shall z look upon the light.’
29 “Behold, God does all these things,
twice, a three times, with a man,
30 to bring back his soul from the pit,
that he may be lighted with b the light of life.
31 Pay attention, O Job, listen to me;
be silent, and I will speak.
32 If you have any words, c answer me;
d speak, for I desire to justify you.
33 If not, e listen to me;
be silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”
Elihu Asserts God’s Justice