JOB 32 [†]So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was
v righteous in his own eyes. 2Then Elihu the son of Barachel w the Buzite,
of the family of Ram, burned with anger. He burned with anger at Job
because he justified himself x rather than God. 3He burned with anger also
at Job’s three friends because they had found no answer, although they had
y declared Job to be in the wrong. 4Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job
because they were older than he. 5And when Elihu saw that there was no
answer in the mouth of these three men, he burned with anger.
6[†]And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said:
“I am young in years,
and you are z aged;
therefore I was timid and afraid
to declare my opinion to you.
7 I said, ‘Let days speak,
and many years teach wisdom.’
8[†] But it is a the spirit in man,
b the breath of the Almighty, that makes him c understand.
9 d It is not the old [1] who are wise,
nor the aged who understand what is right.
10 Therefore I say, ‘Listen to me;
let me also declare my opinion.’
11 “Behold, I waited for your words,
I listened for your wise sayings,
while you searched out what to say.
12 I gave you my attention,
and, behold, there was none among you who refuted Job
or who answered his words.
13 Beware e lest you say, ‘We have found wisdom;
God may vanquish him, not a man.’
14 He has not directed his words against me,
and I will not answer him with your speeches.
15 “They are dismayed; they answer no more;
they have not a word to say.
16 And shall I wait, because they do not speak,
because they stand there, and answer no more?
17 I also will answer with my share;
I also will declare my opinion.
18[†] For I am full of words;
the spirit within me constrains me.
19 Behold, my belly is like wine that has no vent;
like new f wineskins ready to burst.
20 g I must speak, that I may find h relief;
I must open my lips and answer.
21 I will not i show partiality to any man
or use flattery toward any person.
22 For I do not know how to flatter,
else my Maker would soon take me away.
Elihu Rebukes Job