JOHN 6 [†]After this j Jesus went away to the other side of k the Sea of
Galilee, which is l the Sea of Tiberias. 2And a large crowd was following
him, because they saw the signs that he was doing on the sick. 3[†]Jesus
went up on m the mountain, and there he sat down with his disciples. 4Now
n the Passover, the o feast of the Jews, was at hand. 5 p Lifting up his eyes,
then, and seeing that a large crowd was coming toward him, Jesus said to
q Philip, “Where are we to buy bread, so that these people may eat?” 6He
said this to test him, for he himself knew what he would do. 7[†] r Philip
answered him, “Two hundred denarii [1] worth of bread would not be
enough for each of them to get a little.” 8One of his disciples, s Andrew,
Simon Peter’s brother, said to him, 9“There is a boy here who has five
t barley loaves and two fish, but t what are they for so many?” 10[†]Jesus
said, “Have the people sit down.” u Now there was much grass in the place.
So the men sat down, about five thousand in number.
11Jesus then took the
loaves, and v when he had given thanks, he distributed them to those who
were seated. So also the fish, as much as they wanted. 12And when they had
eaten their fill, he told his disciples, “Gather up the leftover fragments, that
nothing may be lost.” 13So they gathered them up and filled twelve baskets
with fragments from the five barley loaves left by those who had eaten.
14[†]When the people saw the sign that he had done, they said, w “This is
indeed x the Prophet y who is to come into the world!”
15[†] z Perceiving then that they were about to come and take him by
force to make him king, Jesus a withdrew again to b the mountain by
himself.
Jesus Walks on Water
16When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, 17[†]got into a
boat, and started across the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus
had not yet come to them. 18The sea became rough because a strong wind
was blowing. 19[†]When they had rowed about three or four miles, [2] they
saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat, and they were
frightened. 20[†] c But he said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.” 21[†]Then
they were glad to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat was at
the land to which they were going.
I Am the Bread of Life
22On the next day the crowd that remained on the other side of the sea saw
that there had been only d one boat there, and that Jesus had not entered the
boat with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone.
23[†]Other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten
the bread after the Lord e had given thanks. 24 f So when the crowd saw that
Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats and
g went to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.
25When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him,
h “Rabbi, when did you come here?” 26[†]Jesus answered them, “Truly,
truly, I say to you, i you are seeking me, not because you saw j signs, but
because you ate your fill of the loaves. 27[†] k Do not work for the food that
perishes, but for l the food that endures to eternal life, which m the Son of
Man will give to you. For on n him God the Father has o set his seal.”
28Then they said to him, “What must we do, to be doing p the works of
God?” 29Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, q that you believe
in him whom r he has sent.” 30So they said to him, s “Then what sign do
you do, that we may see and believe you? What work do you perform?
31[†] t Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness; as it is written, u ‘He
gave them bread from heaven to eat.’” 32[†]Jesus then said to them, “Truly,
truly, I say to you, it was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven,
but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. 33For the bread of God
is v he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.” 34They
said to him, w “Sir, give us this bread always.”
35[†]Jesus said to them, x “I am the bread of life; y whoever comes to me
shall not hunger, and whoever believes in me shall never thirst. 36But I said
to you that you have seen me and yet do not believe. 37[†] z All that a the
Father gives me will come to me, and b whoever comes to me I will never
cast out. 38For c I have come down from heaven, not to do d my own will
but d the will of him e who sent me. 39[†]And f this is the will of him who
sent me, g that I should lose nothing of h all that he has given me, but i raise
it up on the last day.
40[†]For this is the will of my Father, that everyone
who j looks on the Son and k believes in him l should have eternal life, and I
will raise him up on the last day.”
41So the Jews grumbled about him, because he said, m “I am the bread
that came down from heaven.” 42They said, n “Is not this Jesus, o the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother p we know? How does he now say, ‘I have
come down from heaven’?” 43[†]Jesus answered them, “Do not grumble
among yourselves. 44[†]No one can come to me unless the Father who sent
me q draws him. And r I will raise him up on the last day.
45It is written in
the Prophets, s ‘And they will all be t taught by God.’ u Everyone who has
heard and learned from the Father comes to me— 46[†] v not that anyone has
seen the Father except w he who is from God; he x has seen the Father.
47Truly, truly, I say to you, y whoever believes has eternal life. 48
z I am the
bread of life. 49 a Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and b they
died. 50 c This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that one may
eat of it d and not die. 51[†]I am the living bread e that came down from
heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And the bread that
I will give f for the life of the world is g my flesh.”
52The Jews then h disputed among themselves, saying, i “How can this
man give us his flesh to eat?” 53[†]So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say
to you, unless you eat the flesh of j the Son of Man and drink his blood, you
k have no life in you. 54Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood
l has eternal life, and m I will raise him up on the last day.
55For my flesh is
true food, and my blood is true drink. 56Whoever feeds on my flesh and
drinks my blood n abides in me, and I in him. 57As o the living Father p sent
me, and q I live because of the Father, so whoever feeds on me, he also will
live because of me. 58
r This is the bread that came down from heaven, not
like the bread [3] the fathers ate, and died. Whoever feeds on this bread will
live forever.” 59[†]Jesus [4] said these things in the synagogue, as he taught
s at Capernaum.
The Words of Eternal Life
60[†] t When many of his disciples heard it, they said, “This is a hard saying;
who can listen to it?” 61But Jesus, v knowing in himself that his disciples
were grumbling about this, said to them, “Do you take offense at this?
62Then what if you were to see w the Son of Man x ascending to y where he
was before? 63[†] z It is the Spirit who gives life; a the flesh is no help at all.
b The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life. 64[†]But c there are
some of you who do not believe.” (For Jesus v knew from the beginning
who those were who did not believe, and d who it was who would betray
him.) 65And he said, “This is why I told you e that no one can come to me
unless it is granted him by the Father.”
66 f After this many of his disciples turned back and no longer walked
with him. 67[†]So Jesus said to g the Twelve, “Do you want to go away as
well?” 68Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom shall we go? You have
h the words of eternal life, 69[†]and i we have believed, and have come to
know, that j you are k the Holy One of God.” 70Jesus answered them, l “Did
I not choose you, g the Twelve? And yet one of you is m a devil.” 71He
spoke of Judas n the son of Simon Iscariot, for o he, one of the Twelve, was
going to betray him.
Jesus at the Feast of Booths
JOHN 7 After this Jesus went about in Galilee. He would not go about in
Judea, because p the Jews [1] were seeking to kill him. 2[†]Now q the Jews’
Feast of r Booths was at hand. 3[†] s So his brothers [2] said to him, “Leave
here and go to Judea, that your disciples also may see the works you are
doing. 4For no one works in secret if he seeks to be known openly. If you do
these things, t show yourself to the world.” 5[†] u For not even v his brothers
believed in him. 6[†]Jesus said to them, w “My time has not yet come, but
your time is always here. 7[†]The world cannot hate you, but x it hates me
because I testify about it that y its works are evil. 8[†]You go up to the feast.
I am not [3] going up to this feast, for z my time has not yet fully come.”
9After saying this, he remained in Galilee.
10But after a his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up,
not publicly but in private. 11 b The Jews c were looking for him at the feast,
and saying, “Where is he?” 12And there was much d muttering about him
among the people. e While some said, “He is a good man,” others said, “No,
f he is leading the people astray.” 13Yet g for fear of the Jews no one spoke
openly of him.
14[†]About the middle of the feast Jesus went up h into the temple and
began teaching. 15[†]The Jews therefore i marveled, saying, “How is it that
this man has learning, [4] when he has never studied?” 16So Jesus answered
them, j “My teaching is not mine, but his k who sent me. 17
l If anyone’s will
is to do God’s [5] will, m he will know whether the teaching is from God or
whether I n am speaking on my own authority.
18The one who speaks on his
own authority o seeks his own glory; but the one who seeks the glory of him
who sent him is true, and in him there is no falsehood. 19 p Has not Moses
given you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. q Why do you seek to
kill me?” 20[†]The crowd answered, r “You have a demon! Who is seeking
to kill you?” 21[†]Jesus answered them, “I did s one work, and you all
marvel at it. 22[†] t Moses gave you circumcision (not that it is from Moses,
but u from the fathers), and you circumcise a man on the Sabbath. 23If on
the Sabbath a man receives circumcision, so that the law of Moses may not
be broken, v are you angry with me because on the Sabbath I made a man’s
whole body well? 24 w Do not judge by appearances, but judge with right
judgment.”
Can This Be the Christ?
25Some of the people of Jerusalem therefore said, “Is not this the man
whom x they seek to kill? 26[†]And here he is, y speaking openly, and they
say nothing to him! Can it be that z the authorities really know that this is
the Christ? 27[†]But a we know b where this man comes from, and when the
Christ appears, c no one will know where he comes from.” 28[†]So Jesus
proclaimed, d as he taught in the temple, a “You know me, and you know
where I come from. But e I have not come of my own accord. f He who sent
me is true, g and him you do not know.
29 h I know him, for I come i from
him, and j he sent me.” 30[†] k So they were seeking to arrest him, but l no
one laid a hand on him, m because his hour had not yet come. 31Yet n many
of the people believed in him. They said, o “When the Christ appears, will
he do more signs than this man has done?”
Officers Sent to Arrest Jesus
32[†]The Pharisees heard the crowd p muttering these things about him, and
the chief priests and Pharisees sent q officers to arrest him. 33Jesus then
said, r “I will be with you a little longer, and then s I am going to him who
sent me. 34
t You will seek me and you will not find me. Where I am you
cannot come.” 35[†]The Jews said to one another, “Where does this man
intend to go that we will not find him? u Does he intend to go to v the
Dispersion among w the Greeks and teach the Greeks? 36What does he
mean by saying, x ‘You will seek me and you will not find me,’ and, ‘Where
I am you cannot come’?”
Rivers of Living Water
37[†] y On the last day of the feast, the great day, Jesus stood up and cried
out, z “If anyone thirsts, let him a come to me and drink. 38[†]Whoever
believes in me, b as [6] the Scripture has said, c ‘Out of his heart will flow
rivers of d living water.’” 39[†]Now e this he said about the Spirit, f whom
those who believed in him were to receive, g for as yet the Spirit had not
been h given, i because Jesus was not yet glorified.
Division Among the People
40[†]When they heard these words, j some of the people said, “This really is
k the Prophet.” 41Others said, “This is l the Christ.” But some said, m “Is the
Christ to come from Galilee? 42Has not the Scripture said that the Christ
comes n from the offspring of David, and comes o from Bethlehem, the
village p where David was?” 43So there was q a division among the people
over him. 44 r Some of them wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands on
him.
45[†] s The officers then came to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said
to them, “Why did you not bring him?” 46The officers answered, t “No one
ever spoke like this man!” 47The Pharisees answered them, u “Have you
also been deceived? 48
v Have any of the authorities or the Pharisees
believed in him? 49But this crowd that does not know the law is accursed.”
50[†] w Nicodemus, who had gone to him before, and who was one of them,
said to them, 51
x “Does our law judge a man without first y giving him a
hearing and learning what he does?” 52[†]They replied, z “Are you from
Galilee too? Search and see that a no prophet arises from Galilee.”
[The earliest manuscripts do not include 7:53–8:11.] [7]
The Woman Caught in Adultery
53[[They went each to his own house, JOHN 8 but Jesus went to the Mount
of Olives. 2 b Early in the morning he came again to the temple. All the
people came to him, and c he sat down and taught them. 3The scribes and
the Pharisees brought a woman who had been caught in adultery, and
placing her in the midst 4they said to him, “Teacher, this woman has been
caught in the act of adultery.
5Now d in the Law Moses commanded us e to
stone such women. So what do you say?” 6This they said f to test him, g that
they might have some charge to bring against him. Jesus bent down and
wrote with his finger on the ground. 7And as they continued to ask him, he
stood up and said to them, h “Let him who is without sin among you i be the
first to throw a stone at her.” 8And once more he bent down and wrote on
the ground. 9But when they heard it, they went away one by one, beginning
with the older ones, and Jesus was left alone with the woman standing
before him. 10Jesus stood up and said to her, “Woman, where are they? Has
no one condemned you?” 11She said, “No one, Lord.” And Jesus said,
j “Neither do I condemn you; go, and from now on k sin no more.”]]
I Am the Light of the World
12[†] l Again Jesus spoke to them, saying, m “I am the light of the world.
Whoever n follows me will not o walk in darkness, but will have the light of
life.” 13[†]So the Pharisees said to him, p “You are bearing witness about
yourself; your testimony is not true.” 14Jesus answered, “Even if I do bear
witness about myself, q my testimony is true, for I know r where I came
from and s where I am going, but t you do not know where I come from or
where I am going. 15[†] u You judge according to the flesh; v I judge no one.
16Yet even if I do judge, w my judgment is true, for x it is not I alone who
judge, but I and the Father [1] who sent me. 17 y In your Law it is written that
the testimony of two people is true. 18I am the one who bears witness about
myself, and z the Father who sent me bears witness about me.” 19They said
to him therefore, “Where is your Father?” Jesus answered, a “You know
neither me nor my Father. b If you knew me, you would know my Father
also.” 20[†]These words he spoke in c the treasury, as he taught in the
temple; but d no one arrested him, because e his hour had not yet come.
21[†]So he said to them again, f “I am going away, and g you will seek
me, and h you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.”
22So the Jews said, i “Will he kill himself, since he says, ‘Where I am
going, you cannot come’?” 23[†]He said to them, j “You are from below; I
am from above. k You are of this world; l I am not of this world. 24[†]I told
you that you m would die in your sins, for n unless you believe that o I am
he you will die in your sins.” 25So they said to him, p “Who are you?” Jesus
said to them, “Just what I have been telling you from the beginning. 26I
have much to say about you and much to judge, but q he who sent me is
true, and I declare r to the world s what I have heard from him.” 27They did
not understand that t he had been speaking to them about the Father.
28[†]So
Jesus said to them, “When you have u lifted up the Son of Man, v then you
will know that w I am he, and that x I do nothing on my own authority, but
y speak just as the Father taught me. 29And z he who sent me is with me.
z He has not left me alone, for a I always do the things that are pleasing to
him.” 30As he was saying these things, b many believed in him.
The Truth Will Set You Free
31[†]So Jesus said to the Jews who had believed him, c “If you abide in my
word, you are truly my disciples, 32[†]and you will d know the truth, and the
truth e will set you free.” 33They answered him, f “We are offspring of
Abraham and have never been enslaved to anyone. How is it that you say,
‘You will become free’?”
34[†]Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, g everyone who
practices sin is a slave [2] to sin. 35 h The slave does not remain in the house
forever; i the son remains forever.
36[†]So if the Son sets you free, you will
be free indeed. 37[†]I know that you are offspring of Abraham; yet j you
seek to kill me because my word finds no place in you. 38
k I speak of what I
have seen with my Father, and you do what you have heard l from your
father.”
You Are of Your Father the Devil
39[†]They answered him, m “Abraham is our father.” Jesus said to them,
n “If you were Abraham’s children, you would be doing the works Abraham
did, 40but now o you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth p that
I heard from God. This is not what Abraham did. 41You are doing the works
your father did.” They said to him, q “We were not born of sexual
immorality. We have r one Father—even God.” 42Jesus said to them, s “If
God were your Father, you would love me, for t I came from God and u I
am here. v I came not of my own accord, but w he sent me. 43[†] x Why do
you not understand what I say? It is because you cannot y bear to hear my
word. 44[†] z You are of your father the devil, and your will is to do your
father’s desires. a He was a murderer from the beginning, and b does not
stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. c When he lies, he speaks
out of his own character, for he is a liar and the father of lies. 45But because
I tell the truth, you do not believe me. 46Which one of you convicts me of
sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me? 47[†] d Whoever is of God
hears the words of God. e The reason why you do not hear them is that f you
are not of God.”
Before Abraham Was, I Am
48[†]The Jews answered him, “Are we not right in saying that you are a
Samaritan and g have a demon?” 49Jesus answered, “I do not have a demon,
but h I honor my Father, and you dishonor me. 50Yet i I do not seek my own
glory; there is One who seeks it, and he is the judge. 51Truly, truly, j I say to
you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never k see death.” 52The Jews said
to him, “Now we know that you have a demon! l Abraham died, as did the
prophets, yet m you say, ‘If anyone keeps my word, he will never n taste
death.’ 53 o Are you greater than our father Abraham, who died? And the
prophets died! Who do you make yourself out to be?” 54Jesus answered,
p “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. q It is my Father who glorifies
me, r of whom you say, ‘He is our God.’ [3] 55But s you have not known
him. t I know him. If I were to say that I do not know him, I would be u a
liar v like you, but I do know him and I keep his word. 56[†] w Your father
Abraham x rejoiced y that he would see my day. z He saw it and was glad.”
57So the Jews said to him, “You are not yet fifty years old, and have you
seen Abraham?” [4] 58[†]Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you,
before Abraham was, a I am.” 59[†]So b they picked up stones to throw at
him, but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple.
Jesus Heals a Man Born Blind
JOHN 9 As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth. 2[†]And his
disciples asked him, c “Rabbi, d who sinned, e this man or f his parents, that
he was born blind?” 3[†]Jesus answered, “It was not that this man sinned, or
his parents, but g that the works of God might be displayed in him. 4[†]We
must h work the works of him who sent me i while it is day; night is
coming, when no one can work. 5[†]As long as I am in the world, j I am the
light of the world.” 6[†]Having said these things, k he spit on the ground and
made mud with the saliva. l Then he anointed the man’s eyes with the mud
7[†]and said to him, “Go, wash in m the pool of Siloam” (which means
Sent). So he went and washed and n came back seeing.
8The neighbors and those who had seen him before as a beggar were
saying, o “Is this not the man who used to sit and beg?” 9Some said, “It is
he.” Others said, “No, but he is like him.” He kept saying, “I am the man.”
10So they said to him, “Then how were your eyes opened?” 11He answered,
p “The man called Jesus made mud and anointed my eyes and said to me,
‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ So I went and washed and received my sight.”
12They said to him, “Where is he?” He said, “I do not know.”
13They brought to the Pharisees the man who had formerly been blind.
14[†] q Now it was a Sabbath day when Jesus made the mud and opened his
eyes. 15 r So the Pharisees again asked him how he had received his sight.
And he said to them, “He put mud on my eyes, and I washed, and I see.”
16Some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not s from God, t for he does not
keep the Sabbath.” But others said, u “How can a man who is a sinner do
such signs?” And v there was a division among them. 17So they said again
to the blind man, “What do you say about him, since he has opened your
eyes?” He said, w “He is a prophet.”
18 x The Jews [1] did not believe that he had been blind and had received
his sight, until they called the parents of the man who had received his sight
19and asked them, “Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How then
does he now see?” 20His parents answered, “We know that this is our son
and that he was born blind. 21But how he now sees we do not know, nor do
we know who opened his eyes. Ask him; he is of age. He will speak for
himself.” 22[†](His parents said these things y because they feared the Jews,
for z the Jews had already agreed that if anyone should a confess Jesus [2] to
be Christ, b he was to be put out of the synagogue.) 23Therefore his parents
said, c “He is of age; ask him.”
24So for the second time they called the man who had been blind and said
to him, d “Give glory to God. We know that e this man is a sinner.” 25He
answered, “Whether he is a sinner I do not know. One thing I do know, that
though I f was blind, now I see.” 26They said to him, “What did he do to
you? How did he open your eyes?” 27He answered them, g “I have told you
already, and you would not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do
you also want to become his disciples?” 28And they reviled him, saying,
“You are his disciple, but h we are disciples of Moses. 29We know that God
has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, i we do not know where he comes
from.” 30The man answered, “Why, this is j an amazing thing! k You do not
know where he comes from, and yet he opened my eyes. 31[†]We know that
l God does not listen to sinners, but m if anyone is a worshiper of God and
does his will, God listens to him. 32Never since the world began has it been
heard that anyone opened the eyes of a man born blind. 33 n If this man were
not from God, he could do nothing.” 34[†]They answered him, o “You were
born in utter sin, and would you teach us?” And they p cast him out.
35Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him he said,
“Do you believe in q the Son of Man?” [3] 36He answered, r “And who is he,
sir, that I may believe in him?” 37Jesus said to him, “You have seen him,
and s it is he who is speaking to you.” 38He said, “Lord, I believe,” and he
worshiped him. 39Jesus said, t “For judgment I came into this world, u that
those who do not see may see, and v those who see may become blind.”
40Some of the Pharisees near him heard these things, and said to him,
w “Are we also blind?” 41[†]Jesus said to them, “If you were blind, x you
would have no guilt; [4] but now that you say, ‘We see,’ your guilt remains.
I Am the Good Shepherd