JONAH 4 [†]But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, [1] and y he was angry.
2[†]And he prayed to the LORD and said, “O LORD, is not this what I said
when I was yet in my country? z That is why I made haste to flee to
Tarshish; for I knew that you are a a gracious God and merciful, slow to
anger and abounding in steadfast love, and a relenting from disaster.
3[†] b Therefore now, O LORD, please take my life from me, c for it is better
for me to die than to live.” 4And the LORD said, d “Do you do well to be
angry?”
5[†]Jonah went out of the city and sat to the east of the city and e made a
booth for himself there. He sat under it in the shade, till he should see what
would become of the city.
6[†]Now the LORD God appointed a plant [2] and
made it come up over Jonah, that it might be a shade over his head, to save
him from his discomfort. [3] So Jonah was exceedingly glad because of the
plant. 7But when dawn came up the next day, God appointed a worm that
attacked the plant, so that it withered. 8When the sun rose, God appointed a
scorching f east wind, g and the sun beat down on the head of Jonah so that
he h was faint. And he asked that he might die and said, c “It is better for me
to die than to live.” 9[†]But God said to Jonah, i “Do you do well to be
angry for the plant?” And he said, “Yes, I do well to be angry, angry enough
to die.” 10[†]And the LORD said, “You pity the plant, for which you did not
labor, nor did you make it grow, which came into being in a night and
perished in a night. 11And should not I pity j Nineveh, that great city, in
which there are more than 120,000 persons who do not know their right
hand from their left, and also much k cattle?”
Study Notes for Jonah
1:1–3 Jonah’ s Commissioning and Flight. This episode records Jonah’s call
to prophesy and his flight from that call. Two questions drive the plot: (1)
What will happen to the Ninevites? and (2) What will happen to Jonah?
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:1 Son of Amittai means “son of my faithfulness.” Jonah
will remain the object of God’s faithful love.
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:2 Nineveh was on the east bank of the Tigris River, more
than 500 miles (805 km) northeast of Israel. Great is used 14 times in Jonah.
Nineveh was an important city (see 3:3). evil. The Ninevites were evil, and
they were headed for disaster (see esv footnote).
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:3 Tarshish was somewhere in the western Mediterranean—
the opposite direction from Nineveh. From the presence of the LORD is
repeated to emphasize Jonah’s reason for going to Tarshish. Went down is also
a euphemism for death (e.g., Gen. 37:35). Each step away from the presence of
the Lord is one step closer to “going down” to death.
FACT
Tarshish was probably a city on the western shores of the Mediterranean
Sea, which would have represented the very western edge of the known
world in Jonah’s time. Jonah foolishly thought this far-off land would take
him “away from the presence of the LORD” (1:3).
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:4–16 Jonah and the Pagan Sailors. These verses tell of
Jonah’s encounter with pagan sailors. It raises the question, Who truly fears the
Lord—Jonah, or the pagans? At the beginning and end the sailors “fear” (vv. 5,
16); in the middle Jonah claims to “fear” the Lord (v. 9) while the sailors
actually fear (v. 10a).
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:6 Arise, call out echoes God’s command in v. 2. not
perish. A pagan, not Jonah, is concerned that people not die.
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:9–10 made the sea. God created the very seas Jonah tries
to use to flee. Jonah knows now that he cannot escape God’s presence (v. 3).
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:15 The sailors’ actions are in harmony with God’s. As God
had hurled the wind onto the sea (vv. 4–5) to start the storm, the sailors now
hurl Jonah into the sea to stop the storm (v. 12).
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:16 feared the LORD exceedingly. What started as a general
fear (v. 5) grew into an intense fear (v. 10) and matured into the fear—that is,
the reverent worship—of the Lord (v. 16).
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:17–2:10 Jonah’ s Grateful Prayer. Jonah’s prayer
(2:2b–9) is framed by an introduction (1:17–2:2a) and a conclusion (2:10).
JONAH—NOTE ON 1:17 appointed. This is the first of four uses of “appoint” that
highlight God’s sovereign control over creation (compare 4:6–8). Fish is a
general word for a sea creature, which cannot be identified further. However, a
large whale such as a sperm whale could easily swallow a man whole. three
days and three nights. This likely describes the actual number of days, or
parts of three days (compare 1 Sam. 30:12; 2 Kings 20:5, 8). The number three
has associations with return from death or near-death. Perhaps this is why Jesus
compared the time between his own death and resurrection to Jonah’s time in
the fish (Matt. 12:40).
JONAH—NOTE ON 2:1 Finally, Jonah prayed. He did not pray for God to save
the pagan sailors, but he did thank God for saving him.
JONAH—NOTE ON 2:2 Sheol refers to the realm of the dead. Jonah did not
literally pray from Sheol but describes his near-death experience (see Ps. 30:2–
3).
JONAH—NOTE ON 2:3–4 you cast me. Jonah knew that God was working
sovereignly through the sailors (1:15).
JONAH—NOTE ON 2:6 you brought. Jonah’s salvation was by grace alone.
JONAH—NOTE ON 2:8–9 Salvation belongs to the LORD. Jonah knows that God
is the sovereign source of salvation (see 4:1–4).
3:1–3a Jonah’ s Recommissioning and Compliance. The fourth episode
parallels 1:1–3 and focuses on the question, “What will happen to the
Ninevites?” (see note on 1:1–3).
FACT
Nineveh was located along the Tigris River, across from what is now the city
of Mosul in northern Iraq. Its location at the intersection of important trade
routes made it strong and wealthy.
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:1–2 The second time underscores God’s determination to
get his message to the Ninevites and to use Jonah to take it to them.
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:3b–10 Jonah and the Pagan Ninevites. The fifth episode
parallels the second (1:4–16) and focuses on how the pagan Ninevites, just like
the pagan sailors, respond to God’s word. The structure follows the pattern of
repentance found elsewhere in the OT: (1) message of divine judgment (3:3a–
5); (2) account of human repenting (vv. 6–9); and (3) record of divine relenting
(v. 10). Compare 1 Sam. 7:3–14; Joel 1–2.
The City of Nineveh
Nineveh, which was situated at the confluence of the Tigris and Khoser rivers (modern-day Mosul, Iraq),
was first settled in the seventh millennium B.C. According to the Bible, Nimrod was the founder of the city
(Gen. 10:11). Major excavations took place under the direction of Henry Layard from 1845 to 1854. The
diagram pictures the results of those excavations, especially as they reflect the period of the Assyrian
Empire (1420–609 B.C.). Around 1000 B.C. there occurred a great revival of Assyrian power, and
Nineveh became a royal city. It was a thriving city during the first half of the first millennium, and
contained such luxuries as public squares, parks, botanical gardens, and even a zoo. One of the great
archaeological finds of the period is the library of King Ashurbanipal (669–627 B.C.; called Osnappar in
Ezra 4:10). The size of the city was approximately 1,850 acres. The book of Jonah reflects the flourishing
nature of Nineveh at this time (3:1–5). Nineveh eventually fell to the Medes and Babylonians in 612 B.C.
The invading armies dammed the rivers that supplied water to the city, causing a flood that broke through
one of the perimeter walls, giving the foreign armies access to the city.
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:3b an exceedingly great city (see 1:2; 3:2; compare esv
footnote, “a great city to God”). Nineveh is important to God and will receive
his great compassion. three days’ journey in breadth. The phrase may refer to
the time it would take Jonah to walk across the city, preaching his message.
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:4 Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown!
Although the warning sounds like a promise, a condition was implied. If the
people repent, God will relent (see v. 9; 4:2).
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:6 The word that reached the king of Nineveh was the
“word” of the Lord (see 1:1; 3:1, 3). The “king of Nineveh” was probably not
the king of Assyria, since Nineveh was not an Assyrian capital in Jonah’s day.
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:7–8 issued a proclamation. It is likely that v. 5 and vv. 6–9
are in topical rather than chronological order. By putting the people’s response
ahead of the king’s order, the author underscores that they are responding to
Jonah’s message, not just to the king’s command. The Ninevites each turn
from his evil way, whereas the Israelites did not (see 2 Kings 17:13–14).
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:9 Who knows? expresses hope that God may turn and
relent. The phrase we may not perish marks the third time a pagan has been
concerned that people not perish (compare 1:14 and note on 1:6).
JONAH—NOTE ON 3:10 turned from their evil way, God relented of the
disaster. “Evil” and “disaster” translate the same Hebrew word (see note on
1:2). The repetition of the same word shows the close connection between
human action and divine response. God did not carry out the threatened
disaster, because the Ninevites repented of their evil (see note on 3:4).
JONAH
God called the prophet Jonah to travel to the city of Nineveh and to speak
out against it. Nineveh was an Assyrian city, part of an empire known for its
cruelty, that had long threatened Israel. The last thing Jonah wanted was for
these particular people to experience the mercy and compassion of the God
of Israel. Therefore he rejected the Lord’s call and tried to travel as far as he
possibly could in the opposite direction from Nineveh! After three days and
three nights in the belly of a large fish, however, Jonah repented and went to
Nineveh. He delivered a prophetic message against the city, just as the Lord
had commanded. Much to Jonah’s surprise, the people of Nineveh repented,
and the Lord relented from his plans to destroy them. Jonah learned that God
is ready to show mercy to all who will turn their hearts to him. (Jonah 3:6–
10)
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:1–4 Jonah’ s Angry Prayer. The sixth episode parallels the
third (1:17–2:10) and focuses on Jonah’s self-centeredness and hypocrisy. Both
episodes have the same structure: (1) Jonah “prayed to the LORD” (1:17–2:1a
and 4:1–2a); (2) Jonah’s prayer (2:1b–9 and 4:2b–3); and (3) “the LORD
spoke/said” (2:10 and 4:4).
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:1 it displeased Jonah exceedingly. In the previous episode
(see 3:10) the pagans got rid of their “evil” and God got rid of the “disaster” he
had threatened. The pagans are in harmony with God, but Jonah is not. He is
now characterized by “displeasure” (or “evil”).
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:2 This is Jonah’s second prayer. The repetition of prayed to
the LORD (see 2:1) invites the reader to compare the two. gracious God . . .
relenting from disaster. Ironically, this great confession of God’s
compassionate nature (see Ex. 34:6–7; Ps. 145:8) is the cause of Jonah’s anger.
When Jonah received steadfast love, it filled him with thanksgiving (Jonah
2:8). When God extended the same love to the Ninevites, it filled Jonah with
anger.
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:3 My life translates the Hebrew for “my soul,” and to live
translates the Hebrew for “my life.” These two expressions occur in Jonah’s
first prayer, where he is grateful that his “life” was brought up from the pit
(2:6) and that his fainting “life/soul” was revived (2:7). When God extends the
same mercy to the Ninevites, Jonah wishes his “life” and “soul” to be taken.
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:5–11 Jonah’ s Lesson about Compassion. The seventh
and final episode has no parallel and thus stands out as the climax of the
story.
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:6 the LORD God appointed. This is the second use of the
verb “appoint” (see note on 1:17). Discomfort (or “evil”; see esv footnote and
note on 1:2) refers both to Jonah’s outer “discomfort” and to his inner “evil.”
Jonah was exceedingly glad. The grammar of this phrase is identical to that at
the beginning of 4:1 (“It displeased Jonah exceedingly”). This highlights the
contrast between Jonah’s anger at the salvation of the Ninevites and his joy at
his own salvation.
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:9 angry for the plant. God questions the justice of Jonah’s
anger over the destruction of the plant (v. 4).
JONAH—NOTE ON 4:10–11 perished. Finally Jonah expresses concern over
something perishing. Sadly, it is only the plant, not the 120,000 people who do
not know their right hand from their left, which means that they were
untaught regarding moral or spiritual issues.
M i c a h
(return to table of contents)
Micah 1 • Micah 2 • Micah 3 • Micah 4 • Micah 5 • Micah 6 • Micah 7
Introduction to Micah
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Purpose and Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Near East at the Time of Micah
Global Message of Micah
Micah in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Micah
The Global Message of Micah for Today
Study Notes
FACT
The population of Nineveh after the time of Sennacherib’s reign (704–681
B.C.) was close to 300,000, over twice as many people as in Jonah’s time.
This huge population increase was due primarily to Sennacherib making
Nineveh the capital of the Assyrian Empire. He created new streets and open
spaces for trade and built his famous “palace without rival.” These
attractions would have drawn thousands of people to live in Nineveh.
Introduction to Micah
Introduction to Micah
Timeline
Author and Date
Micah prophesied during the reigns of the Judean kings Jotham (750–735 B.C.),
Ahaz (735–715), and Hezekiah (715–687). This was about the same time as
Hosea and Isaiah, though Micah may have served somewhat later. The length
of Micah’s public activity may have been about 20 to 25 years.
Theme
The theme of Micah is judgment and forgiveness. The Lord, the Judge who
scatters his people for their sins, is also the Shepherd-King who in covenant
faithfulness gathers, protects, and forgives them.
Purpose and Background
Micah writes to bring God’s “lawsuit” against his people (3:8). He indicts
Samaria and Jerusalem for their sins (1:2–7). Both Assyria (5:5–6) and
Babylon (4:10) stand ready to carry out God’s judgment. The reigns of Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah, along with the increasing threat of Assyria, provide the
broad background for Micah.
Micah lists specific sins of both the northern and southern kingdoms. These
sins include idolatry (1:7; 5:12–14); the seizure of property (2:2, 9); the failure
of civil leadership (3:1–3, 9–10; 7:3), religious leadership (3:11), and prophetic
leadership (3:5–7, 11); offering sacrifice without truly repenting (6:6–7); and
corrupt business practices and violence (6:10–12).
Key Themes
1. The Lord’s character and the people’s sins demand judgment (1:2–5; 2:3;
6:1–2, 9–11). God’s “sentence” upon his people comes in the form of an
oppressor (1:15; 4:11; 5:1, 5–6) and by means of covenant curses (6:13–
15) caused by covenant unfaithfulness (6:16).
2. A Shepherd-King will gather and deliver a faithful remnant of people
(2:12–13; 4:6–8; 7:14, 18). This deliverer, functioning as a new David,
will come from the very region that was then under Assyrian control (5:2–
5a).
3. Practicing justice and mercy shows covenant faithfulness (6:8; compare
Matt. 23:23).
4. The Lord is the focus of worship. The nations will come to Zion to learn
of the true Lord and to live in peace (Mic. 4:1–5; 7:12; compare Isa. 2:2–
5).
5. Grace flowing from the Lord’s steadfast love (Mic. 7:18–20) overcomes
the penalty due to sin (7:8–9). Forgiveness is possible because of God’s
faithfulness to his promises (7:20).
6. God’s saving acts in the past (6:4–5; 7:14–15) provide hope for his saving
acts in the future (7:19–20).
Outline
I. Superscription (1:1)
II. The Announcement of Judgment on Israel and Judah (1:2–2:13)
III. The Present Injustice and the Future Prospect of Just Rule in Jerusalem
(3:1–5:15)
IV . The Lord’s Indictment and Restoration of His People (6:1–7:20)
The Near East at the Time of Micah
c. 740 B.C.
Micah prophesied to Israel and Judah from the time just before the fall of
Samaria through the time of King Hezekiah of Judah. Micah saw the
destruction of Israel by Assyria. He probably also saw the Lord’s dramatic
rescue of Jerusalem from the Assyrians during Hezekiah’s reign.
The Global Message of Micah
“Who is a God like you?” (Mic. 7:18). This question is the note on which
the prophecy of Micah ends, and it is also a rough translation of the very
name Micah. The theme that resounds throughout this book is the mercy of
which God’s people are assured despite their faithlessness, especially the
faithlessness of their leaders. “Who is a God like you, pardoning iniquity
and passing over transgression for the remnant of his inheritance?” God will
pass over his people’s sin because of his covenant promises.
At the heart of those covenant promises is God’s sovereign purpose of
mercy to the nations. “It shall come to pass in the latter days that the
mountain of the house of the LORD shall be established as the highest of the
mountains, and it shall be lifted up above the hills; and peoples shall flow to
it, and many nations shall come and say, ‘Come, let us go up to the
mountain of the LORD’” (Mic. 4:1–2; compare Isa. 2:2–3). God is on a
mission to extend his steadfast love to all those who call on his name, from
every people group all around the world.
Micah in Redemptive History
The story line of the Bible is one of creation, fall, redemption, and
consummation. God created all things good. He lived with Adam and Eve
in perfect fellowship and harmony. In our father Adam, however, we all
rebelled (Rom. 5:12–19). Humanity fell into corruption and sin, bringing
the whole cosmos with us (Rom. 8:19–22). From early on, however, God
has promised to be with his people and to enable them to overcome their
spiritual enemy, the devil and his forces (Gen. 3:15). Redemption has
begun, climaxing in Christ, in whom “all the promises of God find their
Yes” (2 Cor. 1:20). All who trust him are adopted into God’s family, united
to Christ, indwelt by the Spirit, forgiven their sin, and restored to God. One
day, when Christ comes again, all will be set right and God’s people will be
vindicated.
God’ s indictment of Israel. Micah’s prophecy advances this story line by
focusing on some of the results of the fall, recounting a series of sins among
God’s people in the generations between Adam and Christ. Having been
called to bless the whole world (Gen. 12:1–3), the sin problem for which
Israel was meant to be an instrument of healing has instead infected them
just as it has the rest of the world. God’s people are idolatrous (Mic. 1:7;
5:12–14), oppressive to the vulnerable in society (2:2, 8–9), and dishonest
in their business dealings (6:9–12). In particular, the leaders of Israel, both
civil and religious, are corrupt (3:1–11; 7:3).
God’ s overflowing redemption. But God has not left his people there. He
has determined to save a remnant (Mic. 2:12; 5:7; 7:18), in faithfulness to
his covenant promises. We are a fallen people.But God is a God of
redemption. And this redemption is for all peoples. At the heart of Micah is
the promise that one day the nations of the world will flow to Zion—to
Jerusalem—to worship the one true God. Yet with the coming of Christ, the
stream of nations flowing to Jerusalem became reversed: now, God’s people
flow out from Jerusalem to the ends of the earth (Acts 1:8), bringing God’s
blessing to the nations.
Universal Themes in Micah
The gracious restoration of God’ s people. Despite their sin, God will send a
ruler to “shepherd his flock in the strength of the LORD” (Mic. 5:2–4;
compare John 10:11). “And they shall dwell secure, for now he shall be
great to the ends of the earth. And he shall be their peace” (Mic. 5:4–5).
This ruler, from a whole-Bible perspective, is Jesus Christ (Matt. 2:5–6).
And the peace he won for believers extends, Micah says, “to the ends of the
earth.” The restored people of God, when we take into view all of human
history, is not simply a restored ethnic Israel but a restored humanity from
all the nations of the earth, as anticipated in Micah 4:1–5. This restoration is
beautifully expressed in the words of worship that close Micah’s prophecy:
“Who is a God like you, pardoning iniquity and passing over transgression
for the remnant of his inheritance? He does not retain his anger forever,
because he delights in steadfast love. He will again have compassion on us;
he will tread our iniquities underfoot” (Mic. 7:18–19).
Compassion and advocacy for the oppressed. God is not pleased when
his people perform ritual sacrifices but fail to pursue compassion and
justice. “‘Will the LORD be pleased with thousands of rams, with ten
thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?’ He has told you, O man, what
is good; and what does the LORD require of you but to do justice, and to
love kindness, and to walk humbly with your God?” (Mic. 6:7–8).
Performing external acts of worship while neglecting the needs of those
around us is an offense to God.
The Global Message of Micah for Today
Three of the great themes of the Bible form the backbone of Micah: divine
judgment of sin; merciful restoration due to God’s covenant faithfulness,
achieved through a coming Shepherd-King; and the compassion that God’s
people must accordingly demonstrate to a watching world.
All three of these themes are sources of strength to the church worldwide
today. Those feeling overwhelmed by the spiritual warfare in which they are
embattled can be heartened by God’s determination to set all wrongs right
at the end of history. Those feeling the weight of their sin and the sharp pain
of regret are given strong hope in the steadfast love of the Lord of mercy.
And all God’s people are reminded that formal exercises of worship, though
they are helpful means of expressing heartfelt praise to God, can never
replace the crucial role of justice and compassion for our neighbors. We to
whom God has shown such lavish compassion are compelled by love to
extend compassion to the defenseless and disadvantaged all around us.
Micah opens with a call to all the nations to pay heed to what God is
doing: “Hear, you peoples, all of you; pay attention, O earth, and all that is
in it” (Mic. 1:2). And the book closes with a declaration that people from
everywhere will come to the Lord, even from the hated nations of Assyria
and Egypt (7:12), while other nationalities who have remained impenitent
tremble at the sight of God’s people (7:15–17). From beginning to end,
Micah resounds with a message of salvation through judgment not only for
Israel but for all the nations of the world. He is a refuge to all.