JOSHUA 13 [†]Now Joshua t was old and advanced in years, and the LORD
said to him, “You are old and advanced in years, and there remains yet very
much land u to possess. 2 v This is the land that yet remains: all the w regions
of the Philistines, and all those of the Geshurites 3(from the x Shihor, which
is east of Egypt, northward to the boundary of Ekron, it is counted as
Canaanite; y there are five rulers of the Philistines, those of Gaza, Ashdod,
Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron), and those of z the Avvim, 4in the south, all the
land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that belongs to the Sidonians, to Aphek,
to the boundary of a the Amorites, 5and the land of the b Gebalites, and all
Lebanon, toward the sunrise, from c Baal-gad below Mount Hermon to
d Lebo-hamath, 6all the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon to
e Misrephoth-maim, even all the Sidonians. I myself will drive f them out
from before the people of Israel. Only g allot the land to Israel h for an
inheritance, as I have commanded you. 7Now therefore i divide this land for
an inheritance to the nine tribes and half the tribe of Manasseh.”
The Inheritance East of the Jordan
8With the other half of the tribe of Manasseh [1] the Reubenites and the
Gadites received their inheritance, j which Moses gave them, beyond the
Jordan eastward, as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them: 9
k from
Aroer, which is on the edge of the Valley of the Arnon, and the city that is in
the middle of the valley, and l all the tableland of Medeba as far as Dibon;
10 m and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in
Heshbon, as far as the boundary of the Ammonites; 11[†]and Gilead, and the
n region of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and all Mount Hermon, and
n all Bashan to Salecah; 12 n all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned
in Ashtaroth and in Edrei (he alone was left of n the remnant of the
Rephaim); o these Moses had struck and driven out. 13[†] p Yet the people of
Israel did not drive out the Geshurites or the Maacathites, but Geshur and
Maacath dwell in the midst of Israel to this day.
14[†] q To the tribe of Levi alone Moses gave no inheritance. The
offerings by fire to the LORD God of Israel are their inheritance, as he said
to him.
15And Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of the people of Reuben
according to their clans. 16So their territory was from Aroer, r which is on
the edge of the Valley of the Arnon, and the city that is in the middle of the
valley, and all the tableland by s Medeba; 17with Heshbon, and all its cities
that are in the tableland; s Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon,
18
t and Jahaz, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath, 19and u Kiriathaim, and
u Sibmah, and Zereth-shahar on the hill of the valley,
20and v Beth-peor, and
w the slopes of Pisgah, and w Beth-jeshimoth, 21that is, x all the cities of the
tableland, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned
in Heshbon, y whom Moses defeated with z the leaders of Midian, Evi and
Rekem and Zur and Hur and Reba, the princes of Sihon, who lived in the
land. 22[†] z Balaam also, the son of Beor, the one who practiced divination,
was killed with the sword by the people of Israel among the rest of their
slain. 23And the border of the people of Reuben was the Jordan as a
boundary. This was the inheritance of the people of Reuben, according to
their clans with their cities and villages.
24Moses gave an inheritance also to the tribe of Gad, to the people of
Gad, according to their clans. 25 a Their territory was Jazer, and all the cities
of Gilead, and half the land of the Ammonites, to Aroer, which is east of
b Rabbah, 26and from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim, and from
c Mahanaim to the territory of Debir, [2] 27and in the valley Beth-haram,
Beth-nimrah, d Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king
of Heshbon, having the Jordan as a boundary, to the lower end of the Sea of
e Chinnereth, eastward beyond the Jordan. 28This is the inheritance of the
people of Gad according to their clans, with their cities and villages.
29And Moses gave an inheritance to the half-tribe of Manasseh. It was
allotted to the half-tribe of the people of Manasseh according to their clans.
30Their region extended from f Mahanaim, through all Bashan, the whole
kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all g the towns of Jair, which are in
Bashan, sixty cities, 31and half Gilead, and h Ashtaroth, and Edrei, the cities
of the kingdom of Og in Bashan. These were allotted to the people of
i Machir the son of Manasseh for the half of the people of Machir according
to their clans.
32These are the inheritances that Moses distributed j in the plains of
Moab, beyond the Jordan east of Jericho. 33
k But to the tribe of Levi Moses
gave no inheritance; the LORD God of Israel is their inheritance, k just as he
said to them.
The Inheritance West of the Jordan