JOSHUA 11 [†]When Jabin, king of Hazor, heard of this, he z sent to Jobab
king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,
2and to the kings who were in the northern hill country, and in the a Arabah
south of b Chinneroth, and in the lowland, and c in Naphoth-dor on the
d west, 3to the Canaanites in the east and the west, the Amorites, the
Hittites, the Perizzites, and the e Jebusites in the hill country, and the
f Hivites under g Hermon in the land of h Mizpah. 4[†]And they came out
with all their troops, a great horde, in number i like the sand that is on the
seashore, with very many horses and chariots. 5[†]And all these kings
joined their forces and came and encamped together at the waters of Merom
to fight against Israel.
6[†]And the LORD said to Joshua, j “Do not be afraid of them, for
tomorrow at this time I will give over all of them, slain, to Israel. You shall
k hamstring their horses and burn their l chariots with fire.” 7So Joshua and
all his warriors came m suddenly against them by the waters of Merom and
fell upon them. 8And the LORD gave them into the hand of Israel, who
struck them and chased them as far as n Great Sidon and o Misrephoth-
maim, and eastward as far as the Valley of p Mizpeh. And they struck them
until he left none remaining. 9And Joshua did to them q just as the LORD
said to him: he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots with fire.
10[†]And Joshua turned back at that time and captured r Hazor and struck
its king with the sword, for Hazor formerly was the head of all those
kingdoms. 11And they struck with the sword all who were in it, devoting
them to destruction; [1] s there was none left that breathed. And he burned
Hazor with fire. 12And all the cities of those kings, and all their kings,
Joshua captured, and struck them with the edge of the sword, devoting them
to destruction, t just as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded.
13But none of the cities that stood on mounds did Israel burn, except Hazor
alone; that Joshua burned. 14And all the spoil of these cities and the
livestock, the people of Israel took for their plunder. But every person they
struck with the edge of the sword until they had destroyed them, and they
did not leave any who breathed. 15
u Just as the LORD had commanded
Moses his servant, v so Moses commanded Joshua, w and so Joshua did. He
left nothing undone of all that the LORD had commanded Moses.
16[†]So Joshua took all that land, x the hill country and all the Negeb and
y all the land of Goshen z and the lowland z and the Arabah a and the hill
country of Israel and its lowland 17 b from Mount Halak, which rises toward
Seir, as far as c Baal-gad in the Valley of Lebanon below d Mount Hermon.
And he captured e all their kings and struck them and put them to death.
18Joshua made war f a long time with all those kings. 19There was not a city
that made peace with the people of Israel except g the Hivites, the
inhabitants of Gibeon. They took them all in battle. 20For it was the LORD’s
doing h to harden their hearts that they should come against Israel in battle,
in order that they should be devoted to destruction and should receive no
mercy but be destroyed, i just as the LORD commanded Moses.
21[†]And Joshua came at that time and cut off j the Anakim from the hill
country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the hill country
of Judah, and from all the hill country of Israel. Joshua devoted them to
destruction with their cities. 22There was none of the Anakim left in the land
of the people of Israel. Only in Gaza, k in Gath, and in Ashdod did some
remain. 23[†]So Joshua took the whole land, l according to all that the LORD
had spoken to Moses. m And Joshua gave it for an inheritance to Israel
n according to their tribal allotments. And the land had rest from war.
Kings Defeated by Moses