JOSHUA 14 [†]These are the inheritances that the people of Israel received
in the land of Canaan, which l Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun
and the heads of the fathers’ houses of the tribes of the people of Israel gave
them to inherit. 2[†]Their inheritance was m by lot, just as the LORD had
commanded by the hand of Moses for the nine and one-half tribes. 3[†] n For
Moses had given an inheritance to the two and one-half tribes beyond the
Jordan, o but to the Levites he gave no inheritance among them. 4For p the
people of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. And no portion
was given to the Levites in the land, but only cities to dwell in, with their
pasturelands for their livestock and their substance. 5The people of Israel
did q as the LORD commanded Moses; they allotted the land.
Caleb’s Request and Inheritance
6[†]Then the people of Judah came to Joshua at Gilgal. And Caleb the son
of Jephunneh the r Kenizzite said to him, “You know s what the LORD said
to Moses the man of God in Kadesh-barnea concerning you and me. 7I was
forty years old when Moses the servant of the LORD t sent me from Kadesh-
barnea to spy out the land, and I brought him word again as it was in my
heart. 8[†]But u my brothers who went up with me made the heart of the
people melt; yet I wholly followed the LORD my God. 9And Moses swore
on that day, saying, v ‘Surely the land w on which your foot has trodden
shall be an inheritance for you and your children forever, because you have
wholly followed the LORD my God.’ 10And now, behold, the LORD has kept
me alive, x just as he said, these y forty-five years since the time that the
LORD spoke this word to Moses, while Israel walked in the wilderness. And
now, behold, I am this day y eighty-five years old. 11 z I am still as strong
today as I was in the day that Moses sent me; my strength now is as my
strength was then, for war and a for going and coming. 12So now give me
this hill country of which the LORD spoke on that day, for you heard on that
day how the b Anakim were there, with great fortified cities. It may be that
the LORD will be with me, and I shall drive them out just as the LORD said.”
13Then Joshua c blessed him, and he gave d Hebron to Caleb the son of
Jephunneh for an inheritance. 14Therefore Hebron became the inheritance
of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this day, e because he
wholly followed the LORD, the God of Israel. 15 f Now the name of Hebron
formerly was Kiriath-arba. [1] (Arba [2] was the greatest man among the
Anakim.) g And the land had rest from war.
The Allotment for Judah