JOSHUA 5 [†]As soon as all the kings of the Amorites who were beyond the
Jordan to the west, and all the kings of the Canaanites o who were by the
sea, p heard that the LORD had dried up the waters of the Jordan for the
people of Israel until they had crossed over, their hearts q melted and r there
was no longer any spirit in them because of the people of Israel.
2[†]At that time the LORD said to Joshua, “Make s flint knives and
circumcise the sons of Israel a second time.” 3So Joshua made flint knives
and circumcised the sons of Israel at Gibeath-haaraloth. [1] 4And this is the
reason why Joshua circumcised them: t all the males of the people who
came out of Egypt, all the men of war, had died in the wilderness on the
way after they had come out of Egypt. 5Though all the people who came
out had been circumcised, yet all the people who were born on the way in
the wilderness after they had come out of Egypt had not been circumcised.
6[†]For the people of Israel walked u forty years in the wilderness, until all
the nation, the men of war who came out of Egypt, perished, because they
did not obey the voice of the LORD; the LORD v swore to them that he would
not let them see the land that the LORD had sworn to their fathers to give to
us, w a land flowing with milk and honey.
7So it was x their children, whom
he raised up in their place, that Joshua circumcised. For they were
uncircumcised, because they had not been circumcised on the way.
8When the circumcising of the whole nation was finished, they remained
in their places in the camp until they were healed. 9[†]And the LORD said to
Joshua, “Today I have rolled away the y reproach of Egypt from you.” And
so the name of that place is called z Gilgal [2] to this day.
First Passover in Canaan
10[†]While the people of Israel were encamped at Gilgal, they kept the
Passover a on the fourteenth day of the month in the evening on the plains
of Jericho. 11And the day after the Passover, on that very day, they ate of the
produce of the land, unleavened cakes and parched grain. 12[†]And b the
manna ceased the day after they ate of the produce of the land. And there
was no longer manna for the people of Israel, but they ate of the fruit of the
land of Canaan that year.
The Commander of the LORD’s Army
13[†]When Joshua was by Jericho, he lifted up his eyes and looked, and
behold, c a man was standing before him d with his drawn sword in his
hand. And Joshua went to him and said to him, “Are you for us, or for our
adversaries?” 14And he said, “No; but I am the commander of the army of
the LORD. Now I have come.” And Joshua e fell on his face to the earth and
worshiped and said to him, “What does my lord say to his servant?” 15And
the commander of the LORD’s army said to Joshua, f “Take off your sandals
from your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy.” And Joshua
did so.
The Fall of Jericho