JOSHUA 1 [†]After the death of Moses the a servant of the LORD, the LORD
said to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ b assistant, 2[†]“Moses my servant is
dead. Now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, you and all this people, into
the land that I am giving to them, to the people of Israel. 3[†] c Every place
that the sole of your foot will tread upon I have given to you, just as I
promised to Moses. 4[†] d From the wilderness and this Lebanon as far as
the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites to the Great
Sea toward the going down of the sun shall be your territory.
5[†] e No man
shall be able to stand before you all the days of your life. Just f as I was
with Moses, so g I will be with you. h I will not leave you or forsake you.
6
i Be strong and courageous, for you shall cause this people to inherit the
land that I swore to their fathers to give them. 7Only be strong and j very
courageous, being careful to do according to all the law k that Moses my
servant commanded you. l Do not turn from it to the right hand or to the
left, that you may have good success [1] wherever you go. 8This Book of the
Law shall not depart from your mouth, but m you shall meditate on it day
and night, so that you may be careful to do according to all that is written in
it. For then you will make your way prosperous, and then you will have
good success. 9Have I not commanded you? n Be strong and courageous.
o Do not be frightened, and do not be dismayed, for the LORD your God is
with you wherever you go.”
Joshua Assumes Command
10And Joshua commanded the p officers of the people, 11“Pass through the
midst of the camp and command the people, ‘Prepare your provisions, for
q within three days r you are to pass over this Jordan to go in to take
possession of the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess.’”
12[†]And to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh
Joshua said, 13[†]“Remember the word that s Moses the servant of the LORD
commanded you, saying, ‘The LORD your God is providing you a place of
rest and will give you this land.’ 14[†]Your wives, your little ones, and your
livestock shall remain in the land that Moses gave you beyond the Jordan,
but all the men of valor among you shall pass over armed before your
brothers and shall help them, 15 t until the LORD gives rest to your brothers
as he has to you, and they also take possession of the land that the LORD
your God is giving them. u Then you shall return to the land of your
possession and shall possess it, the land that Moses the servant of the LORD
gave you beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise.”
16And they answered Joshua, “All that you have commanded us we will
do, and wherever you send us we will go. 17Just as we obeyed Moses in all
things, so we will obey you. Only may the LORD your God v be with you, as
he was with Moses! 18Whoever rebels against your commandment and
disobeys your words, whatever you command him, shall be put to death.
w Only be strong and courageous.”
Rahab Hides the Spies