JOSHUA 8 [†]And the LORD said to Joshua, f “Do not fear and do not be
dismayed. Take all the fighting men with you, and arise, go up to Ai. See,
g I have given into your hand the king of Ai, and his people, his city, and his
land. 2[†]And you shall do to Ai and its king as you did h to Jericho and its
king. Only i its spoil and its livestock you shall take as plunder for
yourselves. Lay an ambush against the city, behind it.”
3[†]So Joshua and all the fighting men arose to go up to Ai. And Joshua
chose 30,000 mighty men of valor and sent them out by night. 4And he
commanded them, “Behold, j you shall lie in ambush against the city,
behind it. Do not go very far from the city, but all of you remain ready.
5And I and all the people who are with me will approach the city. And when
they come out against us k just as before, we shall flee before them. 6And
they will come out after us, until we have l drawn them away from the city.
For they will say, ‘They are fleeing from us, just as before.’ So we will flee
before them. 7Then you shall rise up from the ambush and seize the city, for
the LORD your God will give it into your hand. 8[†]And as soon as you have
taken the city, you shall set the city on fire. You shall do according to the
word of the LORD. m See, I have commanded you.” 9So Joshua sent them
out. And they went to the place of ambush and lay between Bethel and Ai,
to the west of Ai, but Joshua spent that night among the people.
10Joshua arose early in the morning and mustered the people and went
up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai. 11And n all the
fighting men who were with him went up and drew near before the city and
encamped on the north side of Ai, with a ravine between them and Ai.
12[†]He took about 5,000 men and set them in ambush between Bethel and
Ai, to the west of the city.
13So they stationed the forces, the main
encampment that was north of the city and its rear guard west of the city.
But Joshua spent that night in the valley.
14And as soon as the king of Ai
saw this, he and all his people, the men of the city, hurried and went out
early to the appointed place [1] toward o the Arabah to meet Israel in battle.
p But he did not know that there was an ambush against him behind the city.
15And Joshua and all Israel q pretended to be beaten before them and fled in
the direction of the wilderness. 16So all the people who were in the city
were called together to pursue them, and as they pursued Joshua they r were
drawn away from the city.
17Not a man was left in Ai or Bethel who did not
go out after Israel. They left the city open and pursued Israel.
18[†]Then the LORD said to Joshua, s “Stretch out the javelin that is in
your hand toward Ai, for I will give it into your hand.” And Joshua
stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city.
19And the men
in the ambush rose quickly out of their place, and as soon as he had
stretched out his hand, they ran and entered the city and captured it. And
they hurried to set the city on fire. 20So when the men of Ai looked back,
behold, the smoke of the city went up to heaven, and they had no power to
flee this way or that, for the people who fled to the wilderness turned back
against the pursuers. 21And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush
had captured the city, and that the smoke of the city went up, then they
turned back and struck down the men of Ai. 22And the others came out from
the city against them, so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side,
and some on that side. And Israel struck them down, until there was t left
none that survived or escaped. 23But the king of Ai they took alive, and
brought him near to Joshua.
24When Israel had finished killing all the inhabitants of Ai in the open
wilderness where they pursued them, and all of them to the very last had
fallen by the edge of the sword, all Israel returned to Ai and struck it down
with the edge of the sword. 25And all who fell that day, both men and
women, were 12,000, all the people of Ai. 26But Joshua did not draw back
his hand with which he u stretched out the javelin until he had devoted all
the inhabitants of Ai to destruction. [2] 27Only the livestock and the spoil of
that city Israel took as their plunder, according to the word of the LORD that
he v commanded Joshua. 28[†]So Joshua burned Ai and made it forever a
w heap of ruins, as it is to this day.
29 x And he hanged the king of Ai on a
tree until evening. y And at sunset Joshua commanded, and they took his
body down from the tree and threw it at the entrance of the gate of the city
and z raised over it a great heap of stones, which stands there to this day.
Joshua Renews the Covenant
30[†]At that time Joshua built an altar to the LORD, the God of Israel, a on
Mount Ebal, 31just as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded the
people of Israel, as it is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, “an altar
of uncut stones, upon which no man has wielded an iron tool.” And they
offered on it burnt offerings to the LORD and sacrificed peace offerings.
32[†]And there, in the presence of the people of Israel, he wrote on b the
stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he had written. 33And all Israel,
c sojourner as well as native born, with their elders and officers and their
judges, stood on opposite sides of the ark before the Levitical priests d who
carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD, half of them in front of Mount
Gerizim and half of them in front of Mount Ebal, e just as Moses the
servant of the LORD had commanded at the first, to bless the people of
Israel. 34[†]And afterward f he read all the words of the law, g the blessing
and the curse, according to all that is written in the Book of the Law.
35There was not a word of all that Moses commanded that Joshua did not
read before all the assembly of Israel, h and the women, and the little ones,
and i the sojourners who lived [3] among them.
The Gibeonite Deception