JOSHUA 6 [†]Now Jericho was shut up inside and outside because of the
people of Israel. None went out, and none came in. 2And the LORD said to
Joshua, “See, g I have given Jericho into your hand, with its king and
mighty men of valor.
3You shall march around the city, all the men of war
going around the city once. Thus shall you do for six days. 4[†]Seven
priests shall bear seven h trumpets of i rams’ horns before the ark. On the
seventh day you shall march around the city seven times, and j the priests
shall blow the trumpets. 5[†]And when they make a long blast with the
ram’s horn, when you hear the sound of the trumpet, then all the people
shall shout with a great shout, and the wall of the city will fall down flat, [1]
and the people shall go up, everyone straight before him.” 6So Joshua the
son of Nun called the priests and said to them, “Take up the ark of the
covenant and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the
ark of the LORD.” 7And he said to the people, “Go forward. March around
the city and let k the armed men pass on before the ark of the LORD.”
8And just as Joshua had commanded the people, the seven priests bearing
the seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the LORD went forward, blowing
the trumpets, with the ark of the covenant of the LORD following them. 9The
armed men were walking before the priests who were blowing the trumpets,
and the l rear guard was walking after the ark, while the trumpets blew
continually.
10But Joshua commanded the people, “You shall not shout or
make your voice heard, neither shall any word go out of your mouth, until
the day I tell you to shout. Then you shall shout.” 11So he caused the ark of
the LORD to circle the city, going about it once. And they came into the
camp and spent the night in the camp.
12Then Joshua rose early in the morning, and m the priests took up the ark
of the LORD.
13And the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams’
horns before the ark of the LORD walked on, and they blew the trumpets
continually. And the armed men were walking before them, and the rear
guard was walking after the ark of the LORD, while the trumpets blew
continually.
14And the second day they marched around the city once, and
returned into the camp. So they did for six days.
15On the seventh day they rose early, at the dawn of day, and marched
around the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that
they marched around the city seven times. 16And at the seventh time, when
the priests had blown the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, “Shout, for
the LORD has given you the city.
17[†]And the city and all that is within it
shall be n devoted to the LORD for destruction. [2] Only Rahab the prostitute
and all who are with her in her house shall live, because she o hid the
messengers whom we sent. 18But you, keep yourselves from the things
devoted to destruction, lest when you have devoted them you take any of
the devoted things and make the camp of Israel p a thing for destruction and
q bring trouble upon it. 19But all silver and gold, and every vessel of bronze
and iron, are holy to the LORD; they shall go into the treasury of the LORD.”
20[†]So the people shouted, and the trumpets were blown. As soon as the
people heard the sound of the trumpet, the people shouted a great shout, and
r the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man
straight before him, and they captured the city.
21[†]Then they s devoted all
in the city to destruction, both men and women, young and old, oxen,
sheep, and donkeys, with the edge of the sword.
22But to the two men who had spied out the land, Joshua said, “Go into
the prostitute’s house and bring out from there the woman and all who
belong to her, t as you swore to her.” 23[†]So the young men who had been
spies went in and brought out Rahab and u her father and mother and
brothers and all who belonged to her. And they brought all her relatives and
put them outside the camp of Israel. 24And they burned the city with fire,
and everything in it. v Only the silver and gold, and the vessels of bronze
and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the LORD.
25But Rahab
the prostitute and her father’s household and all who belonged to her,
Joshua saved alive. And w she has lived in Israel to this day, because she hid
the messengers whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
26[†]Joshua laid an oath on them at that time, saying, x “Cursed before
the LORD be the man who rises up and rebuilds this city, Jericho.
“At the cost of his firstborn shall he
lay its foundation,
and at the cost of his youngest son
shall he set up its gates.”
27 y So the LORD was with Joshua, and z his fame was in all the land.
Israel Defeated at Ai