JUDE 1 [†]Jude, a servant [1] of Jesus Christ and brother of James,
a To those who are called, b beloved in God the Father and c kept for [2]
Jesus Christ:
2May d mercy, e peace, and love be multiplied to you.
Judgment on False Teachers
3[†]Beloved, although I was very eager to write to you about our f common
salvation, I found it necessary to write appealing to you g to contend for the
faith that was once for all delivered to the saints. 4[†]For h certain people
i have crept in unnoticed j who long ago were designated for this
condemnation, ungodly people, who pervert k the grace of our God into
sensuality and l deny our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.
5[†]Now I want m to remind you, although you once fully knew it, that
n Jesus, who saved [3] a people out of the land of Egypt, o afterward
destroyed those who did not believe. 6[†]And p the angels who did not stay
within their own position of authority, but left their proper dwelling, he has
kept in eternal chains under gloomy darkness until the judgment of the great
day— 7[†]just as q Sodom and Gomorrah and r the surrounding cities,
which likewise indulged in sexual immorality and s pursued unnatural
desire, [4] serve as an example by undergoing a punishment of eternal fire.
8[†]Yet in like manner these people also, relying on their dreams, defile
the flesh, reject authority, and t blaspheme the glorious ones. 9But when
u the archangel v Michael, contending with the devil, was disputing w about
the body of Moses, he did not presume to pronounce a blasphemous
judgment, but said, x “The Lord rebuke you.” 10[†] y But these people
blaspheme all that they do not understand, and they are destroyed by all that
they, like unreasoning animals, understand instinctively.
11[†]Woe to them!
For they walked in z the way of Cain and abandoned themselves for the
sake of gain a to Balaam’s error and b perished in Korah’s rebellion.
12[†]These are hidden reefs [5] c at your love feasts, as they feast with you
without fear, d shepherds feeding themselves; e waterless clouds, f swept
along by winds; fruitless trees in late autumn, twice dead, g uprooted;
13
h wild waves of the sea, casting up the foam of i their own shame;
j wandering stars, k for whom the gloom of utter darkness has been reserved
forever.
14[†]It was also about these that Enoch, l the seventh from Adam,
prophesied, saying, m “Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
holy ones, 15 n to execute judgment on all and to convict all the ungodly of
all their deeds of ungodliness that they have o committed in such an
ungodly way, and of all p the harsh things that ungodly sinners have spoken
against him.” 16[†]These are grumblers, malcontents, q following their own
sinful desires; r they are loud-mouthed boasters, s showing favoritism to
gain advantage.
A Call to Persevere
17[†]But you must t remember, beloved, the predictions of the apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 18They [6] said to you, u “In the last time there will be
scoffers, following their own ungodly passions.” 19[†]It is these who cause
divisions, worldly people, v devoid of the Spirit. 20[†]But you, beloved,
w building yourselves up in your most holy faith and x praying in the Holy
Spirit, 21[†] y keep yourselves in the love of God, z waiting for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ that leads to eternal life. 22And have mercy on those
who doubt; 23[†]save others by a snatching them out of b the fire; to others
show mercy c with fear, hating even d the garment [7] stained by the flesh.
Doxology
24[†] e Now to him who is able f to keep you from stumbling and g to present
you h blameless before the presence of his glory with great joy,
25[†]to i the
only God, our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, j be glory, majesty,
dominion, and authority, before all time and now and forever. Amen.
Study Notes for Jude
JUDE—NOTE ON 1–2 Initial Greeting. Although he is Jesus’ brother, Jude
calls himself Jesus’ servant. Jesus is his Lord. He is also the brother of
James, who plays a major role in the NT (Acts 12:17; 15:13; 21:18; Gal.
1:19; 2:9, 12). called. See note on Rom. 8:30. Beloved shows the close
relationship between God the Father and the readers. Jude reminds the
readers that even though false teachers threaten them, they will be kept
by God’s power from falling away.
FACT
Michael (v. 9) is the only archangel identified by name in Scripture. In
the book of Daniel, he is the guardian of God’s people (Dan. 10:13, 21;
12:1). He also leads the heavenly army in the fight against the dragon in
Rev. 12:7.
JUDE—NOTE ON 3–4 Jude’ s Appeal: Contend for the Faith. Jude urges
his readers to stand for the faith against the false teachers.
JUDE—NOTE ON 3 Beloved. Jude, like Peter, emphasizes his strong personal
concern for his readers (see vv. 17, 20; 1 Pet. 2:11; 2 Pet. 3:1). the faith.
The truth about Jesus and salvation through him. once for all delivered to
the saints (that is, Christians). By this time, the content of “the faith” was
established in the teaching of the early church.
JUDE—NOTE ON 4 crept in unnoticed. The false teachers seem to be
Christians. Designated translates a Greek word meaning “to write about or
identify beforehand.” The false teachers did not take God by surprise. He
predicted their coming and their condemnation long before they existed.
They pervert (that is, twist and distort) God’s grace (especially his free
forgiveness of sin) into permission for sensuality (see note on 2 Pet. 2:2;
compare Rom. 3:8; 6:1, 15; 2 Pet. 3:15–16).
JUDE—NOTE ON 5–16 The Immoral Character and Resulting Judgment of
the False Teachers. Jude uses analogies from the OT and Jewish tradition to
declare judgment for the false teachers (see v. 13). He also describes the
immorality that characterizes this group.
JUDE—NOTE ON 5 Jude’s readers once fully knew about God’s judgment.
Apparently their sense of its certainty has lessened. Jesus . . . saved a
people out of the land of Egypt (see Exodus 1–15). This may seem
puzzling, because the name “Jesus” does not appear in the OT. This is a
clear example of the apostolic understanding of the OT. The Son of God has
an eternal divine nature. He was active in the world from the beginning of
creation (see John 1:3; 8:56–58; 12:41; Col. 1:16; Heb. 1:8–12). Jesus, then,
judged and destroyed those who escaped Egypt but failed to trust God
(compare 1 Cor. 10:5; Heb. 3:16–19).
JUDE—NOTE ON 6 angels who did not stay within their own position of
authority. God has kept these beings in eternal chains ever since. Some
scholars think this refers to the fall of angels from heaven. Others think
Jude refers to the sin of angels in Gen. 6:1–4 (see note on 1 Pet. 3:19; see
also Jude 14–15).
JUDE—NOTE ON 7 The people of Sodom and Gomorrah (Genesis 19)
received the judgment of eternal fire. Smoke rose from the site of Sodom
and Gomorrah into the first century A.D. This was taken as a physical
symbol of eternal divine judgment. Pursued unnatural desire refers to the
homosexual activity in Sodom (Gen. 19:5).
JUDE—NOTE ON 8–10 These people also refers to the false teachers (see
chart). They are led astray by relying on their dreams. They follow
experiences they claim are from God. Yet these experiences lead them to
disobey God’s written Word (see v. 18). the glorious ones. Probably evil
angels (see note on 2 Pet. 2:10b–11). Even the archangel (chief or leader of
angels) Michael did not slander or insult the devil when he disputed with
him over the body of Moses. This event is not in the OT. Whatever story
Jude refers to has been lost. In any case, Michael did not condemn the devil.
He left that to God’s authority. He simply told the devil, “The Lord rebuke
you.
” This demonstrates the exclusive power and authority of Jesus Christ,
something the false teachers deny (see Jude 4). Christ also gives believers
authority over demons (see note on Acts 16:18). Jude’s use of a story from
nonbiblical literature does not indicate that Jude thought the book was
inspired by the Holy Spirit. Elsewhere in the NT, writers quote nonbiblical
sources to make a point (see notes on Acts 17:28; Titus 1:12–13).
Jude’ s Application of Prophecies and Events
Jude often refers to prophecies or events and then applies them to the false
teachers with the word “these,” thereby showing how these past events and
prophecies are to be understood.
Reference Past event Application to false teachers Reference
vv. 5–7 Judgment on Israel, angels, and Sodom and Gomorrah “these people also” v. 8
v. 9 Michael did not rebuke the devil “But these people” v. 10
v. 11 Cain, Balaam, Korah “These” v. 12
vv. 14–15 Enoch’s proclamation of judgment “These” v. 16
vv. 17–18 Predictions of apostles “It is these” v. 19
JUDE—NOTE ON 10 All that they do not understand includes true biblical
doctrine about God, angels, and demons, and human sin and forgiveness
through Christ. What they understand instinctively, like animals, is how
to follow their desires, by which they will ultimately be destroyed.
JUDE—NOTE ON 11 Cain (Gen. 4:5–8), Balaam (Num. 22:5–7; 2 Pet. 2:15),
and Korah (Num. 16:1–3, 31–35) were all dissatisfied with what they had
in life. They rebelled against God, greedily seeking selfish gain at any cost.
JUDE—NOTE ON 12–13 Jude compares the false teachers to hidden reefs that
destroy ships without warning. These opponents of the gospel hide in the
church. They share in the love feasts (including the Lord’s Supper). They
act as if they are Christians. Instead, they are like waterless clouds,
promising rain that never falls. They promise fruit but are like fruitless
trees. They are like wandering stars (probably meaning planets) that give
misleading guidance to travelers.
JUDE—NOTE ON 14–15 Enoch, the seventh from Adam (Gen. 5:18–24;
compare 1 Chron. 1:3). Jude describes the coming of the Lord as Enoch
prophesied, and he quotes from 1 Enoch 1.9 (see note on Jude 8–10). The
quote from Enoch focuses on blasphemy against God (e.g., in vv. 3–4, the
opponents’ denial of Jesus Christ). to convict. For punishment, not for
repentance (as in John 16:8). Jude places great emphasis on the
ungodliness of those judged (see note on 2 Pet. 1:6).
JUDE—NOTE ON 16 Jude applies the citation from Enoch to the false
teachers, probably using this list of sins to focus on some of their more
pronounced and obvious misbehaviors. Grumblers calls to mind the
wilderness generation (Ex. 16:7–12; Num. 14:27; 16:41; 17:5). To gain
advantage probably refers to financial gain (see Jude 11).
JUDE—NOTE ON 17–25 Concluding Exhortations. Jude stresses the
proper response of believers to false teachers.
JUDE—NOTE ON 17–18 beloved. See note on v. 3. the predictions of the
apostles. Warnings about false teachers (compare v. 4; Acts 20:29–30; 1
Tim. 4:1–5; 2 Tim. 3:1–5).
JUDE—NOTE ON 19 It is these indicates that the “scoffers” described in v. 18
are the false teachers Jude warns about (see chart). These worldly people . .
. cause divisions within the church over many things. They especially cause
trouble over morality and doctrine. Devoid of the Spirit is an indication
that these opponents are really unbelievers (compare Rom. 8:9; 1 Cor.
2:14).
JUDE—NOTE ON 20 praying in the Holy Spirit. That is, praying in harmony
with the leading of the Holy Spirit, rather than according to one’s own
agenda (see Rom. 8:26–27; Eph. 6:18). The context here is different from
the speaking in tongues described in 1 Cor. 14:14–19.
FACT
While Christians wait for the Lord to return, they should be building
themselves up in the faith, praying, and showing mercy to doubters and
sinners—while also fearing the evil influence of such people (vv. 20–23).
JUDE—NOTE ON 21 keep (or guard) yourselves in the love of God.
Christians do this by growing strong doctrinally (v. 20), persevering in
prayer (v. 20), and waiting for the Lord’s coming. Verses 1–2 and vv. 24–25
teach that God keeps them as well. No true believer will ever lose his or her
salvation (see notes on Heb. 6:6; 2 Pet. 1:10).
JUDE—NOTE ON 23 To save some people (that is, to lead them to faith in
Christ) involves snatching them out of the fire. They were close to God’s
judgment. Others who are caught up in immorality should also be shown
mercy. This should be done with fear, so that the faithful Christian is not
influenced toward evil by the person he is trying to restore. Hating even
the garment stained by the flesh (compare Zech. 3:3–5) implies hating the
sin and everything connected with it. The sinner, however, should be treated
with mercy, not hatred.
JUDE—NOTE ON 24 God has the power to keep from stumbling those who
have put their faith in him. By “stumbling” Jude means falling into sin or
error. If such behavior continues it will eventually lead to falling away from
the faith. God will present the Christian blameless (with no stain or sin).
before the presence of his glory. The brightness that surrounds God’s
presence and visibly shows his holy character. The only possible response
to God’s work for believers is great joy.
JUDE—NOTE ON 25 the only God. There is only one God. He has acted
redemptively (our Savior; see note on 2 Tim. 1:8–10) through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Jesus is the mediator between people and God. The
church praises God through Christ, saying, to God be glory (great honor),
majesty (he is greater than all), dominion (his kingdom has no boundaries),
and authority (he rules over all creation). Before all time means before the
beginning of creation (Gen. 1:1).
R e v e l a t i o n
(return to table of contents)
Revelation 1 • Revelation 2 • Revelation 3 • Revelation 4 • Revelation 5
•
Revelation 6 • Revelation 7 • Revelation 8 • Revelation 9 • Revelation 10
Revelation 11 • Revelation 12 • Revelation 13 • Revelation 14
•
Revelation 15 • Revelation 16 • Revelation 17 • Revelation 18
•
Revelation 19 • Revelation 20 • Revelation 21 • Revelation 22
•
Introduction to Revelation
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Revelation
Global Message of Revelation
Revelation and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Revelation
The Global Message of Revelation for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Revelation
Introduction to Revelation
Timeline
Author and Date
Jesus Christ is the divine author of this “revelation” (1:1). He describes coming
events to his servant John. John, son of Zebedee, was the “beloved disciple”
who also wrote the Fourth Gospel and 1, 2 and 3 John. Most scholars believe
John recorded these visions while imprisoned on the island of Patmos in the
mid-90s A.D. Revelation is addressed specifically to seven first-century
churches in the Roman province of Asia (now western Turkey), but the
message is for all churches everywhere.
Theme
The word “Revelation” translates the Greek word apokalypsis, which means
“disclosure” or “unveiling.” Revelation unveils the unseen spiritual war in
which the church is engaged: the cosmic conflict between God and his Christ
on the one hand, and Satan and his evil allies (both demonic and human) on the
other. In this conflict, Jesus the Lamb has already won the decisive victory
through his sacrificial death, but his church continues to be assaulted by the
dragon, in its death-throes, through persecution (the beast), deceptive heresy
(the false prophet), and the allure of material affluence and cultural approval
(the prostitute). By revealing the spiritual realities behind the church’s trials
and temptations, and by affirming the certainty of Christ’s triumph in the new
heaven and earth, the visions of Revelation fortify believers to endure
suffering. The reader of Revelation is encouraged to stay pure from the defiling
enticements of the present world order.
Key Themes
1. Through his sacrificial death, Jesus Christ has conquered Satan, the
accuser. Jesus has redeemed people from every nation to become a
kingdom of priests, gladly serving in God’s presence (1:5, 18; 5:5–10;
12:1–11).
2. Jesus Christ is present among his churches through his Holy Spirit. He
knows their trials, triumphs, and failures (1:12–3:22).
3. World history, including its disasters, is under the control of Jesus, the
victorious Lamb (5:1–8:1).
4. God is presently holding back his wrath and preventing his enemies’
efforts to destroy the church. He patiently gathers his redeemed people
through their witness for Jesus (6:5–11; 7:1–3; 8:6–12; 9:4–6, 18; 11:3–7;
12:6, 13–17).
5. Present disasters are warnings of increasing judgments to come (6:3–17;
8:6–13; 11:13; 16:1–21; 20:11–15).
6. Believers will continue their faithful testimony to the death. They will
conquer both the dragon and the beast. The martyrs’ victory is now
hidden, but it will be obvious when Christ returns (2:10–11, 26–29; 3:11–
13; 6:9–11; 7:9–17; 11:7–12, 17–18; 12:10–11; 14:1–5; 15:2–4; 20:4–6).
7. Satan attacks the church’s perseverance and purity through persecution,
deceptive teaching, and the temptations of wealth and sensual pleasure
(2:1–3:22; 13:1–18; 17:1–18:24).
8. At the end of the age, the church’s opponents will increase their
persecution. Jesus, the triumphant Word of God, will defeat and destroy
all his enemies. The old heaven and earth, marked by sin and suffering,
will be replaced by the new heaven and earth. The church will be
presented as a pure bride to her husband, the Lamb (16:12–16; 19:11–21;
20:7–22:5).
Outline
Revelation contains four series of seven messages or visions. These include
letters to churches (chs. 2–3), seals on a scroll (4:1–8:1), trumpets (8:2–11:19),
and bowls of wrath (chs. 15–16). There is a general movement from “the things
that are” to “the things that are to take place after this.” Yet the visions
sometimes return to subjects from the previous sections. The order in which
John received the visions does not necessarily indicate the order of the events
they symbolize.
I. Prologue (1:1–8)
II. Body (1:9–22:5)
A. “Things that are”: Christ’s presence with and knowledge of his
churches (1:9–3:22)
B. “Things that shall take place after this”: Christ’s defense of his
church and destruction of its enemies (4:1–22:5)
III. Epilogue (22:6–21)
The Setting of Revelation
c. A.D. 95
John addressed the book of Revelation “to the seven churches that are in
Asia,” namely Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia,
and Laodicea, although there were undoubtedly other churches elsewhere in
the province of Asia (e.g., Miletus and Colossae, see Acts 20:17; Col. 1:2).
John had apparently been exiled from Ephesus to the island of Patmos,
southwest of Ephesus, and it was probably there that he recorded his visions.
The Global Message of Revelation
The last book of the Bible explodes with a cosmic celebration of the
triumph of God’s global purposes in the world.
This triumph takes place amid much suffering, suffering that is
intensified as the final end draws near. Yet the resounding note of
Revelation is hope, as God’s promises come to full completion and the
multi-ethnic family of God enters into the new heavens and the new earth.
Revelation and Redemptive History
From Genesis to Revelation. Revelation brings to a final conclusion the
entire sweep of redemptive history that began in Eden. The last three
chapters of Revelation sum up the history that began in the first three
chapters of Genesis. Genesis 1:1 tells us that God created the heavens and
the earth; Revelation 21:1 speaks of a new heaven and a new earth. Genesis
3:8 speaks of God dwelling with humanity, and Revelation 21:3 speaks of a
restoration of God’s dwelling presence. More connections occur—a flowing
river, a tree of life, the presence of cosmic light, and more—in both the first
three and the last three chapters of the Bible. Eden is being restored. The
world is finally being brought to what it was intended to be.
All through Christ. In all this, Christ himself is the one who restores this
world to the way it was meant to be. The history of redemption that starts in
Genesis passes through Christ to get to Revelation. Indeed, just as God
created a bride for the man in Genesis, so Christ himself is the true
Bridegroom (Mark 2:19). The marriage of Christ to his people is the reality
to which every human marriage points (Eph. 5:31–32). And in Revelation
21, John sees the new Jerusalem “coming down out of heaven from God,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband” (Rev. 21:2).
God’ s international family. Most pertinent of all as we consider the global
message of Revelation is the emphasis it gives to the multinational people
of God. Jesus Christ is worshiped in Revelation because he “ransomed
people for God from every tribe and language and people and nation” (Rev.
5:9). Mankind’s pride at Babel caused them to be scattered and given
different languages and cultures, yet in his great grace God redeems this
diversity and saves a people for himself from all the peoples of the world.
Universal Themes in Revelation
God’ s control of world events. Revelation recounts vividly the woes and
disasters that will befall the world, both throughout history as well as in an
intensified way toward the end of time. Much of the anguish described is
directed at God’s people, who are persecuted for their loyalty to Christ.
Reading all this in Revelation would produce deep discouragement were it
not for the clear teaching that the sovereign hand of God extends to every
detail of history. He is the “Sovereign Lord, holy and true,” who one day
will “judge and avenge” all injustice toward his people (Rev. 6:10; note also
1:7; 2:1).
God’ s defeat of Satan. Through his sacrificial death and victorious
resurrection, Jesus Christ has triumphed over Satan, the accuser of God’s
people. Though he was slain like a helpless lamb, it was through this
suffering that Jesus conquered Satan and wiped away the sins of his people
(Rev. 1:5; 5:5–10). Jesus now has “the keys of Death and Hades” (1:18).
The accuser has been silenced (12:1–11).
God’ s restoration of the cosmos. At the end of Revelation, God’s people
do not escape this earth and fly away to heaven. Rather, heaven comes
down to earth. The new Jerusalem descends, and God’s people take up
residence on the earth with God and the Lamb (Rev. 21:1–22:5). Sin and
Satan have been vanquished. Every inch of the globe—all that was touched
by the curse—will be restored to its true design and intent (22:3). “Behold, I
am making all things new,” says Jesus (21:5).
God’ s creation of a global people. “After this I looked, and behold, a
great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes
and peoples and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb,
clothed in white robes” (Rev. 7:9; see also 5:9). At the end of Revelation we
are told that “the kings of the earth” will bring into the new Jerusalem “the
glory and the honor of the nations” (21:24, 26). And just as God’s saving
grace reaches to every people group on earth, so his righteous judgment and
punishment will extend to “all tribes of the earth” who have rejected Jesus
(1:7). An integral part of the beauty of the new earth will be the rich
diversity of those redeemed by the Lamb from all around the world.
The Global Message of Revelation for Today
The central message of Revelation for the global church today is that, in the
cosmic war currently being waged between the forces of good and evil, the
outcome is secure. Because Jesus has paid with his life for the sins of his
people, Satan’s accusations are emptied of their power. The shed blood of
the Lamb means that the sovereign Lord of the universe is now fully able to
act on behalf of his people while at the same time upholding his perfect
justice.
Ever since his resurrection and ascension, Christ has reigned. Yet Satan’s
influence still exists. Revelation depicts the day when Christ’s reign will be
made visible as he once and for all conquers Satan and his evil allies. On
that day Christ will descend to earth a second time, this time openly as the
triumphant Son of God, with the armies of heaven at his side (Rev. 19:11–
16). Injustice and misery will be permanently defeated. “He will wipe away
every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be
mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore” (21:4). The Lord’s righteous reign
will be established and will extend to every corner of the globe.
In all the challenges that face the global church, this certain truth of
Christ’s return and the exacting of perfect justice is the rock on which we
stand. Especially in times of adversity, we remember his tender care for his
saints. As the church faces internal squabbles, difficult cases of church
discipline, or afflicted consciences due to sin, we remember that we are
under the Lordship of the one who shed his blood for us. When we are
ridiculed, maligned, insulted, or excluded by the world because of our
loyalty to Christ, we remember that we are guaranteed that one day we will
reign on the earth and will forever share in the resplendent glory of God
himself.
From every corner of the globe God’s redeemed people will sing:
“Great and amazing are your deeds,
O Lord God the Almighty!
Just and true are your ways,
O King of the nations!
Who will not fear, O Lord,
and glorify your name?
For you alone are holy.
All nations will come
and worship you,
for your righteous acts have been revealed.” (Rev. 15:3–4)
Prologue