JUDGES 3 [†] p Now these are the nations that the LORD left, to test Israel
by them, that is, all in Israel who had not experienced all the wars in
Canaan. 2It was only in order that the generations of the people of Israel
might know war, to teach war to those who had not known it before.
3[†]These are the nations: q the five lords of the Philistines and all the
Canaanites and the Sidonians and the Hivites who lived on Mount Lebanon,
from Mount Baal-hermon as far as Lebo-hamath. 4They were for r the
testing of Israel, to know whether Israel would obey the commandments of
the LORD, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses. 5So the
people of Israel lived s among the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites. 6 t And their daughters they took to
themselves for wives, and their own daughters they gave to their sons, and
they served their gods.
Othniel
7[†] u And the people of Israel did what was evil in the sight of the LORD.
They forgot the LORD their God and served the Baals and v the Asheroth.
8Therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, w and he sold
them into the hand of x Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia. And the
people of Israel served Cushan-rishathaim eight years. 9[†]But when the
people of Israel y cried out to the LORD, the LORD raised up a z deliverer for
the people of Israel, who saved them, a Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s
younger brother.
10 b The Spirit of the LORD was upon him, and he judged
Israel. He went out to war, and the LORD gave Cushan-rishathaim king of
Mesopotamia into his hand. And his hand prevailed over Cushan-
rishathaim. 11
c So the land had rest forty years. Then Othniel the son of
Kenaz died.
Ehud
12[†] d And the people of Israel again did what was evil in the sight of the
LORD, and the LORD strengthened Eglon e the king of Moab against Israel,
because they had done what was evil in the sight of the LORD.
13He
gathered to himself the Ammonites and the f Amalekites, and went and
defeated Israel. And they took possession of g the city of palms. 14And the
people of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.
15Then the people of Israel h cried out to the LORD, and the LORD raised
up for them h a deliverer, Ehud, the son of Gera, the Benjaminite, i a left-
handed man. The people of Israel sent tribute by him to Eglon the king of
Moab. 16And Ehud made for himself a sword with two edges, a cubit [1] in
length, and he bound it on his right thigh under his clothes. 17And he
presented the tribute to Eglon king of Moab. Now Eglon was a very fat
man. 18And when Ehud had finished presenting the tribute, he sent away the
people who carried the tribute. 19But he himself turned back j at the idols
near Gilgal and said, “I have a secret message for you, O king.” And he
commanded, “Silence.” And all his attendants went out from his presence.
20[†]And Ehud came to him as he was sitting alone in his k cool roof
chamber. l And Ehud said, “I have a message from God for you.” And he
arose from his seat. 21And Ehud reached with his left hand, took the sword
from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly.
22And the hilt also went in
after the blade, and the fat closed over the blade, for he did not pull the
sword out of his belly; and the dung came out. 23Then Ehud went out into
the porch [2] and closed the doors of the roof chamber behind him m and
locked them.
24When he had gone, the servants came, and when they saw that the
doors of the roof chamber were locked, they thought, n “Surely he is
relieving himself in the closet of the cool chamber.” 25And they waited till
they were embarrassed. But when he still did not open the doors of the roof
chamber, they took the key and opened them, and there lay their lord dead
on the floor.
26Ehud escaped while they delayed, and he passed beyond o the idols and
escaped to Seirah. 27When he arrived, p he sounded the trumpet in q the hill
country of Ephraim. Then the people of Israel went down with him from the
hill country, and he was their leader.
28And he said to them, “Follow after
me, r for the LORD has given your enemies the Moabites into your hand.”
So they went down after him and seized s the fords of the Jordan against the
Moabites and did not allow anyone to pass over.
29And they killed at that
time about 10,000 of the Moabites, all strong, able-bodied men; not a man
escaped. 30So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. t And
the land had rest for eighty years.
Shamgar
31[†]After him was u Shamgar the son of Anath, who killed 600 of the
Philistines v with an oxgoad, and he also w saved Israel.
Deborah and Barak