JUDGES 6 [†] k The people of Israel did what was evil in the sight of the
LORD, and the LORD gave them into the hand of l Midian seven years.
2[†]And the hand of Midian overpowered Israel, and because of Midian the
people of Israel made for themselves the dens that are in the mountains and
m the caves and the strongholds. 3For whenever the Israelites planted crops,
the Midianites and n the Amalekites and o the people of the East would
come up against them. 4They would encamp against them p and devour the
produce of the land, as far as Gaza, and leave no sustenance in Israel and no
sheep or ox or donkey.
5For they would come up with their livestock and
their tents; they would come q like locusts in number—both they and their
camels could not be counted—so that they laid waste the land as they came
in. 6And Israel was brought very low because of Midian. And the people of
Israel r cried out for help to the LORD.
7[†]When the people of Israel cried out to the LORD on account of the
Midianites, 8the LORD sent a prophet to the people of Israel. And he said to
them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: s I led you up from Egypt and
brought you out of the house of slavery.
9And I delivered you from the hand
of the Egyptians and from the hand of all who oppressed you, and t drove
them out before you and gave you their land. 10And I said to you, ‘I am the
LORD your God; u you shall not fear the gods of the Amorites in whose land
you dwell.’ But you have not obeyed my voice.”
The Call of Gideon
11[†]Now the angel of the LORD came and sat under the terebinth at Ophrah,
which belonged to Joash v the Abiezrite, while his son w Gideon was
beating out wheat in the winepress to hide it from the Midianites. 12And
x the angel of the LORD appeared to him and said to him, y “The LORD is
with you, O mighty man of valor.” 13And Gideon said to him, “Please,
sir, [1] if the LORD is with us, why then has all this happened to us? And
where are z all his wonderful deeds a that our fathers recounted to us,
saying, ‘Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt?’ But now the LORD has
forsaken us and given us into the hand of Midian.” 14And the LORD [2]
turned to him and said, “Go in this might of yours and save Israel from the
hand of Midian; b do not I send you?” 15And he said to him, c “Please,
Lord, how can I save Israel? Behold, d my clan is the weakest in Manasseh,
and I am the least in my father’s house.” 16And the LORD said to him, e “But
I will be with you, and you shall strike the Midianites as one man.” 17And
he said to him, f “If now I have found favor in your eyes, then g show me a
sign that it is you who speak with me. 18Please h do not depart from here
until I come to you and bring out my present and set it before you.” And he
said, “I will stay till you return.”
19So Gideon went into his house i and prepared a young goat and
unleavened cakes from an ephah [3] of flour. The meat he put in a basket,
and the broth he put in a pot, and brought them to him under the terebinth
and presented them. 20And the angel of God said to him, “Take the meat
and the unleavened cakes, and put them j on this rock, and k pour the broth
over them.” And he did so. 21Then the angel of the LORD reached out the tip
of the staff that was in his hand and touched the meat and the unleavened
cakes. l And fire sprang up from the rock and consumed the meat and the
unleavened cakes. And the angel of the LORD vanished from his sight.
22[†]Then Gideon perceived that he was the angel of the LORD. And Gideon
said, m “Alas, O Lord GOD! For now I have seen the angel of the LORD face
to face.” 23But the LORD said to him, n “Peace be to you. Do not fear; you
shall not die.” 24[†]Then Gideon built an altar there to the LORD and called
it, o The LORD Is Peace. To this day it still stands at p Ophrah, which
belongs to the Abiezrites.
25[†]That night the LORD said to him, “Take your father’s bull, and the
second bull seven years old, and pull down the altar of Baal that your father
has, and cut down q the Asherah that is beside it 26and build an altar to the
LORD your God on the top of the r stronghold here, with stones laid in due
order. Then take the second bull and offer it as a burnt offering with the
wood of the Asherah that you shall cut down.” 27So Gideon took ten men of
his servants and did as the LORD had told him. But because he was too
afraid of his family and the men of the town to do it by day, he did it by
night.
Gideon Destroys the Altar of Baal
28When the men of the town rose early in the morning, behold, the altar of
Baal was broken down, and the Asherah beside it was cut down, and the
second bull was offered on the altar that had been built. 29And they said to
one another, “Who has done this thing?” And after they had searched and
inquired, they said, “Gideon the son of Joash has done this thing.” 30Then
the men of the town said to Joash, “Bring out your son, that he may die, for
he has broken down the altar of Baal and cut down the Asherah beside it.”
31But Joash said to all who stood against him, “Will you contend for Baal?
Or will you save him? Whoever contends for him shall be put to death by
morning. If he is a god, let him contend for himself, because his altar has
been broken down.” 32[†]Therefore on that day Gideon [4] was called
s Jerubbaal, that is to say, “Let Baal contend against him,” because he broke
down his altar.
33Now t all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the people of the East
came together, and they crossed the Jordan and encamped in u the Valley of
Jezreel. 34[†]But v the Spirit of the LORD clothed Gideon, w and he sounded
the trumpet, and the Abiezrites were called out to follow him. 35
x And he
sent messengers throughout all Manasseh, and they too were called out to
follow him. x And he sent messengers to Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali, and
they went up to meet them.
The Sign of the Fleece
36[†] y Then Gideon said to God, “If you will save Israel by my hand, as you
have said, 37behold, I am laying a fleece of wool on the threshing floor. If
there is dew on the fleece alone, and it is dry on all the ground, then I shall
know that you will save Israel by my hand, as you have said.” 38And it was
so. When he rose early next morning and squeezed the fleece, he wrung
enough dew from the fleece to fill a bowl with water.
39Then Gideon said to
God, z “Let not your anger burn against me; let me speak just once more.
Please let me test just once more with the fleece. Please let it be dry on the
fleece only, and on all the ground let there be dew.” 40And God did so that
night; and it was dry on the fleece only, and on all the ground there was
dew.
Gideon’s Three Hundred Men
JUDGES 7 Then a Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) and all the people who were
with him rose early and encamped beside b the spring of Harod. And the
camp of Midian was north of them, c by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.
2[†]The LORD said to Gideon, “The people with you are too many for me
to give the Midianites into their hand, d lest Israel boast over me, saying,
‘My own hand has saved me.’ 3[†]Now therefore proclaim in the ears of the
people, saying, e ‘Whoever is fearful and trembling, let him return home
and hurry away from Mount Gilead.’” Then 22,000 of the people returned,
and 10,000 remained.
4[†]And the LORD said to Gideon, “The people are still too many. Take
them down to the water, and I will test them for you there, and anyone of
whom I say to you, ‘This one shall go with you,’ shall go with you, and
anyone of whom I say to you, ‘This one shall not go with you,’ shall not
go.” 5So he brought the people down to the water. And the LORD said to
Gideon, “Every one who laps the water with his tongue, as a dog laps, you
shall set by himself. Likewise, every one who kneels down to drink.” 6And
the number of those who lapped, putting their hands to their mouths, was
300 men, but all the rest of the people knelt down to drink water.
7And the
LORD said to Gideon, f “With the 300 men who lapped I will save you and
give the Midianites into your hand, and let all the others go every man to
his home.” 8So the people took provisions in their hands, and their
trumpets. And he sent all the rest of Israel every man to his tent, but
retained the 300 men. And the camp of Midian was below him g in the
valley.
9That same h night the LORD said to him, “Arise, go down against the
camp, i for I have given it into your hand. 10[†]But if you are afraid to go
down, go down to the camp with Purah your servant. 11
j And you shall hear
what they say, and afterward your hands shall be strengthened to go down
against the camp.” k Then he went down with Purah his servant to the
outposts of the armed men who were in the camp. 12And the Midianites and
the Amalekites and l all the people of the East lay along the valley like
locusts in abundance, and their camels were without number, m as the sand
that is on the seashore in abundance. 13[†]When Gideon came, behold, a
man was telling a dream to his comrade. And he said, “Behold, I dreamed a
dream, and behold, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian
and came to the tent and struck it so that it fell and turned it upside down,
so that the tent lay flat.” 14And his comrade answered, “This is no other
than the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel; God has given
into his hand Midian and all the camp.”
15As soon as Gideon heard the telling of the dream and its interpretation,
he worshiped. And he returned to the camp of Israel and said, “Arise, for
the LORD has given the host of Midian into your hand.” 16And he divided
the 300 men into three companies and put trumpets into the hands of all of
them and empty jars, with n torches inside the jars. 17And he said to them,
“Look at me, and do likewise. When I come to the outskirts of the camp, do
as I do. 18[†]When I blow the trumpet, I and all who are with me, then blow
the trumpets also on every side of all the camp and shout, o ‘For the LORD
and for Gideon.’”
Gideon Defeats Midian
19[†]So Gideon and the hundred men who were with him came to the
outskirts of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch, when they had
just set the watch. And they blew the trumpets and smashed the jars that
were in their hands. 20[†]Then the three companies blew the trumpets and
broke the jars. They held in their left hands the torches, and in their right
hands the trumpets to blow. o And they cried out, “A sword for the LORD
and for Gideon!” 21Every man stood in his place around the camp, p and all
the army ran. They cried out and fled. 22[†] q When they blew the 300
trumpets, r the LORD set s every man’s sword against his comrade and
against all the army. And the army fled as far as Beth-shittah toward
Zererah, [1] as far as the border of Abel-meholah, by Tabbath. 23And the
men of Israel were called out from Naphtali and from Asher and from all
Manasseh, and they pursued after Midian.
24 t Gideon sent messengers throughout u all the hill country of Ephraim,
saying, “Come down against the Midianites and capture the waters against
them, as far as v Beth-barah, and also the Jordan.” So all the men of
Ephraim were called out, and they captured the waters as far as Beth-barah,
and also the Jordan. 25And they captured w the two princes of Midian, Oreb
and Zeeb. They killed Oreb x at the rock of Oreb, and Zeeb they killed at
the winepress of Zeeb. Then they pursued Midian, and they brought the
heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon y across the Jordan.
Gideon Defeats Zebah and Zalmunna