JUDGES 17 [†]There was a man of t the hill country of Ephraim, whose
name was Micah. 2And he said to his mother, “The 1,100 pieces of silver
that were taken from you, about which you uttered a curse, and also spoke it
in my ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it.” And his mother said,
u “Blessed be my son by the LORD.” 3[†]And he restored the 1,100 pieces of
silver to his mother. And his mother said, “I dedicate the silver to the LORD
from my hand for my son, to make v a carved image and w a metal image.
Now therefore I will restore it to you.” 4So when he restored the money to
his mother, his mother x took 200 pieces of silver and gave it to the
silversmith, who made it into a carved image and a metal image. And it was
in the house of Micah. 5[†]And the man Micah had a shrine, and he made
y an ephod and z household gods, and a ordained [1] one of his sons, who
became his priest. 6[†] b In those days there was no king in Israel.
c Everyone did what was right in his own eyes.
7Now there was a young man of d Bethlehem in Judah, of the family of
Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there. 8And the man departed
from the town of Bethlehem in Judah to sojourn where he could find a
place. And as he journeyed, he came to e the hill country of Ephraim to the
house of Micah. 9[†]And Micah said to him, “Where do you come from?”
And he said to him, “I am a Levite of Bethlehem in Judah, and I am going
to sojourn where I may find a place.” 10And Micah said to him, “Stay with
me, and be to me f a father and a priest, and I will give you ten pieces of
silver a year and a suit of clothes and your living.” And the Levite went in.
11And the Levite g was content to dwell with the man, and the young man
became to him like one of his sons. 12And Micah h ordained the Levite, and
the young man i became his priest, and was in the house of Micah. 13Then
Micah said, “Now I know that the LORD will prosper me, because I have a
Levite as priest.”
Danites Take the Levite and the Idol