LEVITICUS 17 [†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to Aaron
and his sons and to all the people of Israel and say to them, This is the thing
that the LORD has commanded. 3If any one of the house of Israel u kills an
ox or a lamb or a goat in the camp, or kills it outside the camp, 4and v does
not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it as a gift to the
LORD in front of the tabernacle of the LORD, bloodguilt shall be imputed to
that man. He has shed blood, and that man w shall be cut off from among
his people. 5This is to the end that the people of Israel may bring their
sacrifices that they sacrifice x in the open field, that they may bring them to
the LORD, to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and sacrifice
them y as sacrifices of peace offerings to the LORD.
6And the priest shall
y throw the blood on the altar of the LORD at the entrance of the tent of
meeting and burn the fat z for a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
7So they shall
no more sacrifice their sacrifices to goat demons, after whom they a whore.
This shall be a statute forever for them throughout their generations.
8“And you shall say to them, Any one of the house of Israel, or of the
strangers who sojourn among them, who b offers a burnt offering or
sacrifice 9and c does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to
offer it to the LORD, w that man shall be cut off from his people.
Laws Against Eating Blood
10[†]“If any one of the house of Israel or of the strangers who sojourn
among them d eats any blood, I will e set my face against that person who
eats blood and will cut him off from among his people. 11[†] f For the life of
the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it for you on the altar g to make
atonement for your souls, h for it is the blood that makes atonement by the
life. 12[†]Therefore I have said to the people of Israel, No person among
you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger who sojourns among you eat
blood.
13“Any one also of the people of Israel, or of the strangers who sojourn
among them, who takes in hunting any beast or bird that may be eaten shall
i pour out its blood and j cover it with earth. 14For the life of every
creature [1] is its k blood: its blood is its life. [2] Therefore I have said to the
people of Israel, You shall not eat the blood of any creature, for the life of
every creature is its blood. Whoever eats it shall be cut off. 15[†] l And every
person who eats what dies of itself or what is torn by beasts, m whether he is
a native or a sojourner, n shall wash his clothes and o bathe himself in water
and be unclean until the evening; then he shall be clean. 16But if he does not
wash them or bathe his flesh, p he shall bear his iniquity.”
Unlawful Sexual Relations