LEVITICUS 1 [†] a The LORD called Moses and spoke to him b from the tent
of meeting, saying, 2“Speak to the people of Israel and say to them, c When
any one of you brings an offering to the LORD, you shall bring your offering
of livestock from the herd or from the flock.
3[†]“If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he shall offer d a
male without blemish. He shall bring it to the entrance of the tent of
meeting, that he may be accepted before the LORD.
4 e He shall lay his hand
on the head of the burnt offering, and it shall be f accepted for him g to
make atonement for him. 5[†]Then he shall kill the bull before the LORD,
and Aaron’s sons the priests shall bring the blood h and throw the blood
against the sides of the altar that is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
6Then he shall flay the burnt offering and cut it into pieces, 7and the sons of
Aaron the priest shall put fire on the altar and i arrange wood on the fire.
8And Aaron’s sons the priests shall arrange the pieces, the head, and the fat,
on the wood that is on the fire on the altar; 9but its entrails and its legs he
shall wash with water. And the priest shall burn all of it on the altar, as j a
burnt offering, a food offering [1] with a k pleasing aroma to the LORD.
10“If his gift for a burnt offering is from the flock, from the sheep or
goats, he shall bring a male without blemish, 11 l and he shall kill it on the
north side of the altar before the LORD, and Aaron’s sons the priests shall
throw its blood against the sides of the altar.
12And he shall cut it into
pieces, with its head and its fat, and the priest shall arrange them on the
wood that is on the fire on the altar,
13but the entrails and the legs he shall
wash with water. And the priest shall offer all of it and burn it on the altar; it
is j a burnt offering, a food offering with k a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
14[†]“If his offering to the LORD is a burnt offering of birds, then he shall
bring his offering of m turtledoves or pigeons. 15And the priest shall bring it
to the altar and wring off its head and burn it on the altar. Its blood shall be
drained out on the side of the altar.
16He shall remove its crop with its
contents [2] and cast it n beside the altar on the east side, in the place for
ashes. 17He shall tear it open by its wings, but o shall not sever it
completely. And the priest shall burn it on the altar, on the wood that is on
the fire. It is a burnt offering, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the
LORD.
Laws for Grain Offerings