LEVITICUS 10 [†]Now y Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, z each took
his censer and put fire in it and laid incense on it and offered
a unauthorized [1] fire before the LORD, which he had not commanded them.
2And fire b came out from before the LORD and consumed them, and they
died before the LORD.
3Then Moses said to Aaron, “This is what the LORD
has said: ‘Among c those who are near me d I will be sanctified, and before
all the people I will be glorified.’” e And Aaron held his peace.
4[†]And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of f Uzziel the
uncle of Aaron, and said to them, “Come near; carry your brothers away
from the front of the sanctuary and out of the camp.” 5So they came near
and carried them in their coats out of the camp, as Moses had said. 6And
Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar and Ithamar his sons, g “Do not let the
hair of your heads hang loose, and do not tear your clothes, lest you die, and
h wrath come upon all the congregation; but let your brothers, the whole
house of Israel, bewail the burning that the LORD has kindled. 7 i And do not
go outside the entrance of the tent of meeting, lest you die, j for the
anointing oil of the LORD is upon you.” And they did according to the word
of Moses.
8[†]And the LORD spoke to Aaron, saying, 9[†] k “Drink no wine or strong
drink, you or your sons with you, when you go into the tent of meeting, lest
you die. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations. 10You are
to l distinguish between the holy and the common, and between the unclean
and the clean, 11and m you are to teach the people of Israel all the statutes
that the LORD has spoken to them by Moses.”
12Moses spoke to Aaron and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his surviving sons:
“Take the n grain offering that is left of the LORD’s food offerings, and eat it
unleavened beside the altar, for o it is most holy.
13You shall eat it in a holy
place, because it is your due and your sons’ due, from the LORD’s food
offerings, for p so I am commanded. 14But the q breast that is waved and the
thigh that is contributed you shall eat in a clean place, you and your sons
and your daughters with you, for they are given as your due and your sons’
due from the sacrifices of the peace offerings of the people of Israel. 15
r The
thigh that is contributed and the breast that is waved they shall bring with
the food offerings of the fat pieces to wave for a wave offering before the
LORD, and it shall be yours and your sons’ with you as a due forever, as the
LORD has commanded.”
16[†]Now Moses diligently inquired about s the goat of the sin offering,
and behold, it was burned up! And he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar,
the surviving sons of Aaron, saying, 17 t “Why have you not eaten the sin
offering in the place of the sanctuary, since o it is a thing most holy and has
been given to you that you may bear the iniquity of the congregation, to
make atonement for them before the LORD? 18Behold, u its blood was not
brought into the inner part of the sanctuary. You certainly ought to have
eaten it in the sanctuary, v as I commanded.” 19And Aaron said to Moses,
“Behold, w today they have offered their sin offering and their burnt
offering before the LORD, and yet such things as these have happened to
me! If I had eaten the sin offering today, x would the LORD have approved?”
20And when Moses heard that, he approved.
Clean and Unclean Animals