LEVITICUS 19 [†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to all the
congregation of the people of Israel and say to them, t You shall be holy, for
I the LORD your God am holy.
3 u Every one of you shall revere his mother
and his father, and v you shall keep my Sabbaths: I am the LORD your God.
4
w Do not turn to idols x or make for yourselves any gods of cast metal: I
am the LORD your God.
5 y “When you offer a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD, you shall
offer it so z that you may be accepted. 6It shall be eaten the same day you
offer it or on the day after, and anything left over until the third day shall be
burned up with fire. 7If it is eaten at all on the third day, it is a tainted; it will
not be accepted, 8and everyone who eats it shall b bear his iniquity, because
c he has profaned what is holy to the LORD, and that person shall be cut off
from his people.
Love Your Neighbor as Yourself
9[†] d “When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap your field
right up to its edge, neither shall you gather the gleanings after your harvest.
10And you shall not strip your vineyard bare, neither shall you gather the
fallen grapes of your vineyard. You shall leave them for the poor and for the
sojourner: I am the LORD your God.
11[†] e “You shall not steal; f you shall not deal falsely; you shall not lie to
one another.
12
g You shall not swear by my name falsely, and so h profane
the name of your God: I am the LORD.
13 i “You shall not oppress your neighbor or rob him. j The wages of a
hired worker shall not remain with you all night until the morning. 14 k You
shall not curse the deaf or put a stumbling block before the blind, but you
shall l fear your God: I am the LORD.
15 m “You shall do no injustice in court. You shall not be partial to the
poor or defer to the great, but in righteousness shall you judge your
neighbor.
16 n You shall not go around as a slanderer among your people,
and you shall not o stand up against the life [1] of your neighbor: I am the
LORD.
17[†] p “You shall not hate your brother in your heart, but q you shall
reason frankly with your neighbor, lest you r incur sin because of him.
18[†] s You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge against the sons of
your own people, but t you shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the
LORD.
You Shall Keep My Statutes
19[†] u “You shall keep my statutes. You shall not let your cattle breed with a
different kind. v You shall not sow your field with two kinds of seed, nor
shall you wear a garment of cloth made of two kinds of material.
20[†]“If a man lies sexually with a woman who is a slave, assigned to
another man and not yet ransomed or given her freedom, a distinction shall
be made. They shall not be put to death, because she was not free; 21but
w he shall bring his compensation to the LORD, to the entrance of the tent of
meeting, a ram for a guilt offering. 22And the priest shall make atonement
for him with the ram of the guilt offering before the LORD for his sin that he
has committed, and he shall be forgiven for the sin that he has committed.
23[†]“When you come into the land and plant any kind of tree for food,
then you shall regard its fruit as forbidden. [2] Three years it shall be
forbidden to you; it must not be eaten. 24And in the fourth year all its fruit
shall be holy, an offering of praise to the LORD.
25But in the fifth year you
may eat of its fruit, to increase its yield for you: I am the LORD your God.
26[†] x “You shall not eat any flesh with the blood in it. y You shall not
interpret omens or z tell fortunes. 27 a You shall not round off the hair on
your temples or mar the edges of your beard. 28You shall not make any
b cuts on your body for the dead or tattoo yourselves: I am the LORD.
29 c “Do not profane your daughter by making her a prostitute, lest the
land fall into prostitution and the land become full of depravity.
30 d You
shall keep my Sabbaths and e reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD.
31 f “Do not turn to mediums or necromancers; do not seek them out, and
so make yourselves unclean by them: I am the LORD your God.
32 g “You shall stand up before the gray head and honor the face of an old
man, and you shall h fear your God: I am the LORD.
33 i “When a stranger sojourns with you in your land, you shall not do him
wrong. 34 j You shall treat the stranger who sojourns with you as the native
among you, and k you shall love him as yourself, for you were strangers in
the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
35 l “You shall do no wrong in judgment, in measures of length or weight
or quantity.
36 m You shall have just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and
a just hin: [3] I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of
Egypt. 37And n you shall observe all my statutes and all my rules, and do
them: I am the LORD.”
Punishment for Child Sacrifice