LEVITICUS 2 [†]“When anyone brings a p grain offering as an offering to the
LORD, his offering shall be of fine flour. q He shall pour oil on it and put
frankincense on it 2and bring it to Aaron’s sons the priests. And he shall
take from it a handful of the fine flour and oil, with all of its frankincense,
and the priest shall burn this as its r memorial portion on the altar, a food
s offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
3But the t rest of the grain
offering shall be for Aaron and his sons; u it is a most holy part of the
LORD’s food offerings.
4“When you bring a grain offering baked in the oven as an offering, it
shall be v unleavened loaves of fine flour mixed with oil or unleavened
wafers smeared with oil. 5And if your offering is a grain offering w baked
on a griddle, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mixed with oil. 6You shall
break it in pieces and pour oil on it; it is a grain offering. 7And if your
offering is a grain offering cooked in a pan, it shall be made of fine flour
with oil. 8And you shall bring the grain offering that is made of these things
to the LORD, and when it is presented to the priest, he shall bring it to the
altar.
9And the priest shall take from the grain offering its memorial portion
and burn this on the altar, a food x offering with a y pleasing aroma to the
LORD.
10But the z rest of the grain offering shall be for Aaron and his sons;
z it is a most holy part of the LORD’s food offerings.
11[†]“No grain offering that you bring to the LORD shall be made with
a leaven, for you shall burn no leaven nor any honey as a food offering to
the LORD.
12 b As an offering of firstfruits you may bring them to the LORD,
but they shall not be offered on the altar for a pleasing aroma. 13You c shall
season all your grain offerings with salt. You shall not let the d salt of the
covenant with your God be missing from your grain offering; e with all
your offerings you shall offer salt.
14“If you offer a grain offering of firstfruits to the LORD, you shall offer
for the grain offering of your firstfruits fresh f ears, roasted with fire,
crushed new grain. 15And g you shall put oil on it and lay frankincense on
it; it is a grain offering. 16And the priest shall burn as its h memorial portion
some of the crushed grain and some of the oil with all of its frankincense; it
is a food offering to the LORD.
Laws for Peace Offerings