LEVITICUS 24 [†] b The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Command the
people of Israel to bring you pure oil from beaten olives for the lamp, that a
light may be kept burning regularly.
3Outside the veil of the testimony, in
the tent of meeting, Aaron shall arrange it from evening to morning before
the LORD regularly. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations.
4He shall arrange the lamps on the c lampstand of pure gold [1] before the
LORD regularly.
Bread for the Tabernacle
5[†]“You shall take fine flour and bake twelve d loaves from it; two tenths
of an ephah [2] shall be in each loaf. 6And you shall set them in two piles,
six in a pile, e on the table of pure gold [3] before the LORD.
7And you shall
put pure frankincense on each pile, that it may go with the bread as a
memorial portion as a food offering to the LORD.
8 f Every Sabbath day
Aaron shall arrange it before the LORD regularly; it is from the people of
Israel as a covenant forever.
9And g it shall be for Aaron and his sons, and
h they shall eat it in a holy place, since it is for him a most holy portion out
of the LORD’s food offerings, a perpetual due.”
Punishment for Blasphemy
10[†]Now an Israelite woman’s son, whose father was an Egyptian, went out
among the people of Israel. And the Israelite woman’s son and a man of
Israel fought in the camp, 11and the Israelite woman’s son i blasphemed the
j Name, and cursed. Then they k brought him to Moses. His mother’s name
was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan. 12And l they put
him in custody, m till the will of the LORD should be clear to them.
13[†]Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 14 n “Bring out of the camp
the one who cursed, and let all who heard him o lay their hands on his head,
and let all the congregation stone him. 15And speak to the people of Israel,
saying, Whoever curses his God shall p bear his sin. 16Whoever
q blasphemes the name of the LORD shall surely be put to death. All the
congregation shall stone him. The sojourner as well as the native, when he
blasphemes the Name, shall be put to death.
An Eye for an Eye
17[†] r “Whoever takes a human life shall surely be put to death.
18
s Whoever takes an animal’s life shall make it good, life for life. 19If
anyone injures his neighbor, t as he has done it shall be done to him,
20fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; whatever injury he has
given a person shall be given to him. 21
s Whoever kills an animal shall
make it good, r and whoever kills a person shall be put to death. 22You shall
have the u same rule for the sojourner and for the native, for I am the LORD
your God.” 23So Moses spoke to the people of Israel, and v they brought out
of the camp the one who had cursed and stoned him with stones. Thus the
people of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses.
The Sabbath Year