LEVITICUS 18 [†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the
people of Israel and say to them, q I am the LORD your God. 3 r You shall not
do as they do in the land of Egypt, where you lived, and s you shall not do
as they do in the land of Canaan, to which I am bringing you. You shall not
walk in their statutes. 4 t You shall follow my rules [1] and keep my statutes
and walk in them. q I am the LORD your God. 5[†] t You shall therefore keep
my statutes and my rules; u if a person does them, he shall live by them: I
am the LORD.
6[†]“None of you shall approach any one of his close relatives to uncover
nakedness. I am the LORD.
7 v You shall not uncover the nakedness of your
father, which is the nakedness of your mother; she is your mother, you shall
not uncover her nakedness. 8
w You shall not uncover the nakedness of your
father’s wife; it is your father’s nakedness. 9 x You shall not uncover the
nakedness of your sister, your father’s daughter or your mother’s daughter,
whether brought up in the family or in another home. 10You shall not
uncover the nakedness of your son’s daughter or of your daughter’s
daughter, for their nakedness is your own nakedness. 11You shall not
uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife’s daughter, brought up in your
father’s family, since she is your sister.
12You shall not uncover the
nakedness of your father’s sister; she is your father’s relative. 13You shall
not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister, for she is your mother’s
relative. 14You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s brother, that
is, you shall not approach his wife; she is your aunt. 15 y You shall not
uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law; she is your son’s wife, you
shall not uncover her nakedness. 16 z You shall not uncover the nakedness of
your brother’s wife; it is your brother’s nakedness. 17You shall not uncover
the nakedness of a woman and of her daughter, and you shall not take her
son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter to uncover her nakedness; they
are relatives; it is depravity.
18[†]And you shall not take a woman as a
a rival wife to her sister, uncovering her nakedness b while her sister is still
alive.
19[†] c “You shall not approach a woman to uncover her nakedness while
she is in her menstrual uncleanness. 20[†] d And you shall not lie sexually
with your neighbor’s wife and so make yourself unclean with her.
21[†]You
shall not give any of your children to e offer them [2] to f Molech, and so
g profane the name of your God: I am the LORD.
22[†] h You shall not lie
with a male as with a woman; it is an abomination. 23
i And you shall not lie
with any animal and so make yourself unclean with it, neither shall any
woman give herself to an animal to lie with it: it is j perversion.
24[†] k “Do not make yourselves unclean by any of these things, l for by
all these the nations I am driving out before you have become unclean,
25and the m land became unclean, so that I punished its iniquity, and the
land n vomited out its inhabitants. 26But o you shall keep my statutes and
my rules and do none of these abominations, either the p native or the
stranger who sojourns among you 27(for the people of the land, who were
before you, did all of these abominations, so that the land became unclean),
28lest the land vomit you out when you make it unclean, as it vomited out
the nation that was before you. 29For everyone who does any of these
abominations, the persons who do them shall be cut off from among their
people. 30
q So keep my charge never to practice r any of these abominable
customs that were practiced before you, and never to make yourselves
unclean by them: s I am the LORD your God.”
The LORD Is Holy