LEVITICUS 3 [†]“If his offering is i a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offers
an animal from the herd, male or female, j he shall offer it k without blemish
before the LORD.
2And l he shall lay his hand on the head of his offering and
kill it at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and Aaron’s sons the priests
shall throw the blood against the sides of the altar.
3And from the sacrifice
of the peace offering, as a food offering to the LORD, he shall offer m the fat
covering the entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails, 4
n and the two
kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the long lobe of the
liver that he shall remove with the kidneys. 5Then Aaron’s sons o shall burn
it on the altar on top of the burnt offering, which is on the wood on the fire;
it is a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
6[†]“If his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering to the LORD is an
animal from the flock, male or female, he shall offer it k without blemish.
7If he offers a lamb for his offering, then he shall offer it before the LORD,
8lay his hand on the head of his offering, and kill it in front of the tent of
meeting; and Aaron’s sons shall throw its blood against the sides of the
altar.
9Then from the sacrifice of the peace offering he shall offer as a food
offering to the LORD its fat; he shall remove the whole p fat tail, cut off
close to the backbone, and the fat that covers the entrails and all the fat that
is on the entrails 10and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the
loins and the long lobe of the liver that he shall remove q with the kidneys.
11And the priest shall burn it on the altar as r a food offering to the LORD.
12“If his offering is a goat, then he shall offer it before the LORD 13and lay
his hand on its head and kill it in front of the tent of meeting, and the sons
of Aaron shall throw its blood against the sides of the altar.
14Then he shall
offer from it, as his offering for a food offering to the LORD, the fat covering
the entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails 15and the two kidneys with
the fat that is on them at the loins and the long lobe of the liver that he shall
remove q with the kidneys. 16[†]And the priest shall burn them on the altar
as a r food offering with a pleasing aroma. s All fat is the LORD’s. 17It shall
be a statute forever throughout your generations, in all your dwelling
places, that you eat neither s fat nor t blood.”
Laws for Sin Offerings