LUKE 12 [†]In the meantime, t when so many thousands of the people had
gathered together that they were trampling one another, he began to say to
his disciples first, u “Beware of v the leaven of the Pharisees, w which is
hypocrisy.
2[†] x Nothing is covered up that will not be revealed, or hidden
that will not be known. 3Therefore whatever you have said in the dark shall
be heard in the light, and what you have whispered in y private rooms shall
be proclaimed on z the housetops.
Have No Fear
4“I tell you, my friends, a do not fear those who kill the body, and after that
have nothing more that they can do. 5[†]But I will warn you whom to fear:
fear him b who, after he has killed, has authority to cast into hell. [1] Yes, I
tell you, fear him! 6[†]Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? [2] And
c not one of them is forgotten before God. 7Why, d even the hairs of your
head are all numbered. Fear not; e you are of more value than many
sparrows.
Acknowledge Christ Before Men
8“And I tell you, f everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of
Man also will acknowledge g before the angels of God, 9[†]but h the one
who denies me before men i will be denied g before the angels of God.
10[†]And j everyone who speaks a word k against the Son of Man l will be
forgiven, but the one who m blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be
forgiven. 11[†] n And when they o bring you before the synagogues and p the
rulers and p the authorities, q do not be anxious about how you should
defend yourself or what you should say,
12
r for the Holy Spirit will teach
you in that very hour what you ought to say.”
The Parable of the Rich Fool
13[†] s Someone in the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide
the inheritance with me.” 14But he said to him, t “Man, u who made me a
judge or arbitrator over you?” 15And he said to them, v “Take care, and be
on your guard against all covetousness, for one’s life does not consist in the
abundance of his possessions.” 16And he told them a parable, saying,
w “The land of a rich man produced plentifully,
17and he thought to himself,
x ‘What shall I do, for I have nowhere to store my crops?’ 18And he said, ‘I
will do this: I will tear down my y barns and build larger ones, and there I
will store all my grain and my goods. 19[†]And I will say to my soul, “Soul,
you have ample goods laid up z for many years; relax, a eat, drink, be
merry.”’ 20But God said to him, b ‘Fool! z This night c your soul is required
of you, and the things you have prepared, d whose will they be?’ 21So is the
one e who lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God.”
Do Not Be Anxious
22[†]And he said to his disciples, f “Therefore I tell you, g do not be anxious
about your life, what you will eat, nor about your body, what you will put
on. 23For life is more than food, and the body more than clothing.
24 h Consider the ravens: they neither sow nor reap, they have neither
storehouse nor barn, and yet God feeds them. i Of how much more value
are you than the birds! 25[†]And which of you by being anxious can add a
single hour to his j span of life? [3] 26If then you are not able to do as small a
thing as that, why are you anxious about the rest? 27Consider the lilies, how
they grow: they neither toil nor spin, [4] yet I tell you, k even Solomon in all
his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 28[†]But if God so clothes the
grass, which is alive in the field today, and tomorrow is thrown into the
oven, how much more will he clothe you, l O you of little faith! 29[†]And
do not seek what you are to eat and what you are to drink, nor m be worried.
30For n all the nations of the world seek after these things, and n your Father
knows that you need them. 31Instead, o seek p his [5] kingdom, q and these
things will be added to you.
32 r “Fear not, little s flock, for t it is your Father’s good pleasure to give
you u the kingdom. 33[†] v Sell your possessions, and w give to the needy.
x Provide yourselves with moneybags that do not grow old, with y a treasure
in the heavens that does not fail, where no thief approaches and no moth
destroys. 34 z For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
You Must Be Ready
35[†] a “Stay dressed for action [6] and b keep your lamps burning, 36and be
like men who are c waiting for their master to come home from the wedding
feast, so that they may open the door to him at once when he comes and
d knocks. 37[†] e Blessed are those servants [7] whom the master finds
e awake when he comes. Truly, I say to you, f he will dress himself for
service and g have them recline at table, and he will come and serve them.
38If he comes in the second watch, or in the third, and finds them awake,
blessed are those servants! 39
h But know this, that if the master of the house
had known at what hour i the thief was coming, he [8] would not have left
his house to be broken into. 40You also must be j ready, for k the Son of
Man is coming at an hour you do not expect.”
41[†]Peter said, “Lord, l are you telling this parable for us or for all?”
42And the Lord said, “Who then is m the faithful and m wise n manager,
whom his master will set over his household, to give them their portion of
food at the proper time? 43 o Blessed is that servant [9] whom his master will
find so doing when he comes. 44Truly, I say to you, p he will set him over
all his possessions. 45But if that servant says to himself, ‘My master q is
delayed in coming,’ and begins to beat the male and female servants, and to
eat and drink and r get drunk, 46the master of that servant will come s on a
day when he does not expect him and s at an hour he does not know, and
will cut him in pieces and put him with the unfaithful. 47 t And that servant
who u knew his master’s will but v did not get ready u or act according to
his will, will receive a w severe beating. 48 x But the one who did not know,
and did what deserved a beating, y will receive a light beating. z Everyone
to whom much was given, of him much will be required, and from him to
whom they entrusted much, they will demand the more.
Not Peace, but Division
49[†] a “I came to cast fire on the earth, and would that it were already
kindled! 50 b I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how c great is my
distress until it is accomplished! 51
d Do you think that I have come to give
peace on earth? e No, I tell you, but rather division. 52For from now on in
one house there will be five divided, three against two and two against
three. 53They will be divided, f father against son and son against father,
mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against
her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
Interpreting the Time
54[†]He also said to the crowds, g “When you see h a cloud rising in the
west, you say at once, ‘A shower is coming.’ And so it happens. 55And
g when you see the south wind blowing, you say, ‘There will be i scorching
heat,’ and it happens. 56You hypocrites! j You know how to interpret the
appearance of earth and sky, but why do you not know how to interpret the
present time?
Settle with Your Accuser
57[†]“And why k do you not judge l for yourselves what is right? 58
m As you
go with your accuser before the magistrate, make an effort to settle with
him on the way, lest he drag you to the judge, and the judge hand you over
to the officer, and the officer put you in prison. 59I tell you, n you will never
get out until you have paid the very last o penny.” [10]
Repent or Perish