MALACHI 3 [†] g “Behold, I send h my messenger, and i he will prepare
the way before me. And the Lord j whom you seek will suddenly come to
his temple; and k the messenger of the covenant in whom you delight,
behold, he is coming, says the LORD of hosts. 2[†]But l who can endure the
day of his coming, and who can stand when he appears? For m he is like a
refiner’s fire and like fullers’ soap. 3He will sit n as a refiner and purifier of
silver, and he will purify the sons of Levi and refine them like gold and
silver, and they will bring o offerings in righteousness to the LORD. [1]
4 p Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem will be pleasing to the LORD as
in the days of old and as in former years.
5“Then I will draw near to you for judgment. I will be q a swift witness
against the sorcerers, against the adulterers, against those who swear falsely,
against those r who oppress the hired worker in his wages, s the widow and
the fatherless, against those who thrust aside the sojourner, and do not fear
me, says the LORD of hosts.
Robbing God
6[†]“For t I the LORD do not change; u therefore you, O children of Jacob,
are not consumed. 7 v From the days of your fathers you have turned aside
from my statutes and have not kept them. w Return to me, and I will return
to you, says the LORD of hosts. x But you say, ‘How shall we return?’
8[†]Will man rob God? Yet you are robbing me. x But you say, ‘How have
we robbed you?’ y In your tithes and contributions. 9
z You are cursed with a
curse, for you are robbing me, the whole nation of you. 10[†] a Bring the full
tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house. And thereby
b put me to the test, says the LORD of hosts, if I will not open c the windows
of heaven for you and pour down for you a blessing until there is no more
need. 11I will rebuke d the devourer [2] for you, so that it will not destroy the
fruits of your soil, and your vine in the field shall not fail to bear, says the
LORD of hosts. 12Then e all nations will call you blessed, for you will be f a
land of delight, says the LORD of hosts.
13[†] g “Your words have been hard against me, says the LORD. h But you
say, ‘How have we spoken against you?’ 14You have said, i ‘It is vain to
serve God. j What is the profit of our keeping his charge or of walking as in
mourning before the LORD of hosts? 15And now we call k the arrogant
blessed. k Evildoers not only prosper but l they put God to the test and they
escape.’”
The Book of Remembrance
16[†]Then those who feared the LORD m spoke with one another. The LORD
paid attention and heard them, and n a book of remembrance was written
before him of those who feared the LORD and esteemed his name.
17[†]“They shall be mine, says the LORD of hosts, o in the day when I make
up p my treasured possession, and I will spare them as a man spares his son
who serves him. 18Then once more you shall q see the distinction between
the righteous and the wicked, between one who serves God and one who
does not serve him.
The Great Day of the LORD
MALACHI 4 [1] “For behold, r the day is coming, s burning like an oven,
when t all the arrogant and t all evildoers u will be stubble. The day that is
coming u shall set them ablaze, says the LORD of hosts, so that it will leave
them neither root nor branch. 2[†]But for you v who fear my name, w the
sun x of righteousness shall rise y with healing in its wings. You shall go out
z leaping like calves from the stall. 3And you shall tread down the wicked,
for they will be ashes under the soles of your feet, a on the day when I act,
says the LORD of hosts.
4[†] b “Remember c the law of my servant Moses, the statutes and rules [2]
that I commanded him at Horeb for all Israel.
5 d “Behold, I will send you e Elijah the prophet f before the great and
awesome day of the LORD comes. 6And he will g turn the hearts of fathers to
their children and the hearts of children to their fathers, lest I come and
h strike the land with a decree of utter destruction.” [3]
Study Notes for Malachi
MALACHI—NOTE ON 1:1 Heading. Malachi declares his role as God’s
messenger and identifies his book as the word of the LORD. Nearly half
of the verses in Malachi include “says the LORD of hosts,” “says the
LORD,” or some similar phrase. This prophecy is an oracle (compare
Zech. 9:1), literally, “a burden.” Malachi directs his message to the post-
exilic community of Judah. By referring to them as “Israel,” he identifies
them as recipients of all God’s covenant promises as well as the covenant
obligations.
FACT
The title LORD of hosts appears more frequently in Malachi than in any
other OT book. Following the exile, Judah was a very small province
within the vast Persian Empire. It had no army of its own, leaving its
people painfully aware of how limited their resources were. Malachi
wants to remind his people that God is in command of a great heavenly
host that stands ready to defend Judah.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 1:2–5 First Dispute: Are God’ s People Still
Special in His Sight? Malachi answers the doubts of the people who
question God’s love because of Israel’s many current problems.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 1:2–4 Malachi reminds readers of God’s covenantal
love for Jacob. In this context loved means chosen for a particular service
rather than affection. Likewise, Esau I have hated refers to Esau’s
descendants being rejected for a particular service rather than God actually
hating the people. Although Jacob and Esau were brothers, God chose Jacob
to be the bearer of the messianic promise (see Rom. 9:13). Malachi
compares the nations that descended from Jacob and Esau—Israel and
Edom. Neither country will escape God’s judgment. Judah will be
graciously restored after her punishment, but Edom will not recover (Mal.
1:4).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 1:2 But you say. See Introduction, Key Themes and
Outline.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 1:6–2:9 Second Dispute: Why Do Israel’ s Offerings
Not Honor God? Malachi argues that Israel’s love for God should be
questioned, not God’s love for Israel. Malachi focuses on Israel’s priests
(2:1–9). It is their responsibility to guard the sanctuary from being misused
and to inspect all sacrifices (1:8; Lev. 22:17–25). The priests have failed in
both of these areas.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 1:11 Surprisingly, Malachi refers to people presenting
incense and pure offerings in many places, even among the nations, not
just in the Jerusalem temple (see Deuteronomy 12). The phrase from the
rising of the sun to its setting indicates this will happen in a future time of
great blessing (see Isa. 45:6; 59:19).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 2:2–9 Since the priests failed to guard the temple’s
purity, the Lord threatens to punish them. Because they “despised” (1:6) the
Lord’s name, they will be despised and abased before all the people
(2:9). Because they “polluted” God (1:7), he will pollute and remove them
from the sanctuary, like dung from the sacrifices is removed (2:3; Ex.
29:14). Because they presumed to bless the people, as if God had accepted
Israel’s sacrifices, God will now curse their blessings.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 2:10–16 Third Dispute: Why Are the People Faithless
in Marriage? Malachi now describes Israel’s infidelity, which dishonors
God. Malachi condemns two marital offenses: intermarriage with
unbelievers (v. 11; compare Neh. 13:29) and unjust divorce (Mal. 2:13–16).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 2:13–14 Israel was distressed because God refused to
accept their offerings, as evidenced by his not blessing them. Malachi
explains that God was acting as a witness against husbands who were
unfaithful to their wives. Marriage is not just a contract, a two-way
agreement between husband and wife. Instead it is a covenant. Since the
LORD was witness to it, marriage is a three-way relationship in which the
couple is accountable to God. For this reason, faithfulness in marriage is
linked to spiritual well-being. A couple’s relationship must be in good
standing, or their prayers will be hindered (compare 1 Pet. 3:7). Other OT
passages describing marriage as a covenant include Prov. 2:17; Ezek. 16:8–
14; and especially Genesis 2. There, covenant words and phrases describe a
husband’s duty (“leave” and “hold fast”; Gen. 2:24; “this at last is bone of
my bones”; Gen. 2:23).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 2:15 Make them one recalls Adam and Eve’s marriage
(Gen. 2:24). The Lord intends marriage to produce godly offspring
(literally, “a seed of God”). Describing a person as “a seed of God” shows
that God is a “Father” to his people through redemption (Mal. 1:6; 2:10;
compare “the daughter of a foreign god” in v. 11).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 2:16 This verse is one of the most difficult OT passages
to translate. The esv footnote includes the other most common translation.
Despite the translation difficulty, this passage states clearly that the biblical
standard for marriage comes from Gen. 2:23–24, which teaches that
marriage is a covenant. Malachi refers to creation (Mal. 2:10), and calls
marriage a covenant (v. 14). He refers to the oneness described in Gen. 2:24
(“union,” Mal. 2:15), and reminds his readers of the purpose of marriage
(“godly offspring,” v. 15). The Israelite man who unjustly divorces his wife
commits a serious offense. He violates the creation order and breaks his
covenantal relationship with his wife. These acts damage his character
(covers his garment with violence). But divorce affects more than just the
husband and wife; it affects the whole community’s social and spiritual
health (vv. 13–15). (See also the notes on Matt. 5:31–32; 19:3–9; Mark
10:10–12; 1 Cor. 7:15.)
MALACHI—NOTE ON 2:17–3:5 Fourth Dispute: Is God Unjust? Malachi
accuses the people of wearying the Lord with their insulting complaints:
“Everyone who does evil is good in the sight of the LORD” and “Where is
the God of justice?” Many of the people were distressed at the apparent
failure of the prophetic promises of restoration (see Haggai 2; Zech. 1:16–
17; 2:1–13; 8:1–9:17). Israel was experiencing continued social and
political oppression and economic hardship (Neh. 1:3; 9:36–37; Mal. 3:11).
Worse, they had been promised that God would return to his temple with
greater glory than was seen at Moses’ tabernacle or Solomon’s temple (e.g.,
Zech. 1:16–17; 2:4–5, 10–13; 8:3–8; 9:9–17), but the rebuilt temple lacked
any visible display of glory. Now, however, Malachi promises that “the
Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to his temple” (Mal. 3:1). This
prophecy was fulfilled ultimately in Jesus Christ (John 1:14; 2 Cor. 4:6).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:1 Apparently Israel was repeating the error of Amos’s
listeners (Amos 5:18). They supposed that the Lord’s coming would be only
for blessing. They did not realize that the Lord’s coming would also be for
judgment. He would come to be a “witness” against all evildoers, including
his own people. In preparation for this fearful appearance, the Lord
promises, Behold, I send my messenger, and he will prepare the way
before me. The NT identifies John the Baptist as this messenger. He
prepares the way for the Lord whom you seek, that is, Jesus the Messiah
(see Matt. 11:10–14).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:2–5 When the Lord comes, he will purify some
sinners (vv. 2–4) and judge others (v. 5). The purifying will be thorough and
severe, as if it were done with a refiner’s fire and fullers’ soap (compare
Heb. 12:7–11). The heat of the refiner’s fire helped separate impurities from
the metal. Similarly, the fuller washed clothes using strong lye soap.
3:6–12 Fifth Dispute: How Shall We Repent? Can a Man Rob God?
Malachi returns to the subject of Israel’s offerings, which he first addressed
in the second dispute (1:6–2:9). When Israel returned from exile, they
neglected to offer their tithes (see Neh. 13:10–13). Crop failure and disease
did not excuse their unfaithfulness (Mal. 3:10–11). These natural disasters
were the result of, not the cause of, the nation’s disobedience (v. 8).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:6–7 I the LORD do not change. God’s character and
eternal purposes remain constant. He always responds to repentance with
forgiveness. They can trust him when he says, Return to me and I will
return to you. Because of the Lord’s covenant faithfulness they are not
consumed. Therefore implies that God’s promise to bless the world
through Abraham’s descendants will not be defeated. He stands ready to
bless the children of Jacob again.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:8 you are robbing me. The people were not giving
to God the offerings that rightly belonged to him.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:10–12 God promises that if his people faithfully
present their full tithe, then the desperately needed rain will come (v. 10).
Crop failure will cease (v. 11), and the promise to Abraham that all nations
will call you blessed (v. 12; Ps. 72:17) will be fulfilled. By saying, “put me
to the test,” God challenges the people to give the tithe they owe him and
then watch to see if he will keep his promise. God promises to meet all their
needs, but not necessarily all their wishes. This is not a promise of wealth in
return for obedience.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:13–4:3 Sixth Dispute: How Have We Spoken
against God? This section echoes the first dispute. Here the focus is on
God’s own people. Some embrace the covenant, and some do not.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:13–15 Israel complains that it is vain to serve God.
They believe they have been faithful and have not been blessed.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:16 In sharp contrast to the people in vv. 13–15, a
second group is now mentioned: those who feared the LORD and
esteemed his name. Just as the Lord heard the insults of the first group, so
he hears the faithful conversation of the second. A book of remembrance
is written in God’s presence concerning these faithful believers. God will
correctly judge the deeds of the righteous and the wicked.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 3:17–4:3 The Lord promises that, for those faithful
believers listed in the “book of remembrance” (3:16), a day is coming when
God will say, They shall be mine, his treasured possession (3:17;
compare Ex. 19:5). God will spare them as a man spares his son who
serves him.
MALACHI—NOTE ON 4:2 Just as the sun drives away darkness and clouds,
bringing light and joy, so the sun of righteousness will scatter gloom,
oppression, and injustice. The “righteousness” brought by this “sun”
includes both judgment on evildoers and reward for the righteous. Its wings
are a poetic image for the rays of this sun. These wings bring healing to all
who come under them. Scholars have understood this prophecy to be
fulfilled in Christ, who is “the light of the world” (John 8:12; compare John
1:4–6).
MALACHI—NOTE ON 4:4–6 Summary. These closing appeals summarize the
main points of Malachi’s prophecy: Remember the law of my servant
Moses (the focus of the first three disputes) and prepare for the promised
sending of Elijah the prophet before the coming day of the LORD (the
focus of the last three disputes). Horeb is another name for Mount Sinai
(see Exodus 19–20; Deut. 5:2). Malachi reveals that the future messenger
will have a prophetic ministry like Elijah’s. The NT identifies John the
Baptist as the fulfillment of Malachi’s prophesied Elijah (Matt. 11:10–14;
17:10–13). (For more on “the day of the LORD,” see note on Amos 5:18–
20.)
M a t t h e w
(return to table of contents)
Matthew 1 • Matthew 2 • Matthew 3 • Matthew 4 • Matthew 5
•
Matthew 6 • Matthew 7 • Matthew 8 • Matthew 9 • Matthew 10
•
Matthew 11 • Matthew 12 • Matthew 13 • Matthew 14 • Matthew 15
Matthew 16 • Matthew 17 • Matthew 18 • Matthew 19 • Matthew 20
Matthew 21 • Matthew 22 • Matthew 23 • Matthew 24 • Matthew 25
Matthew 26 • Matthew 27 • Matthew 28
•
•
•
Introduction to Matthew
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Matthew
Global Message of Matthew
Matthew and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Matthew
The Global Message of Matthew for Today
Study Notes
MALACHI
Malachi, whose name means “my messenger,” probably ministered during
the same time as Ezra and Nehemiah. He prophesied to Judah about 80
years after Haggai and Zechariah had encouraged the people to rebuild the
temple. Though Haggai and Zechariah had assured Judah that God’s
blessings would return to his people, bringing peace and prosperity, they
had not yet experienced these promised blessings. Instead, they were facing
a prolonged period of economic difficulty and hardship. Rather than wait
faithfully on the Lord, the people sinned against him with half-hearted
worship and imperfect offerings. God used Malachi to reaffirm his love for
Israel and to rebuke them for their unfaithfulness to him. Malachi urged
Judah to remember the Law of Moses, as well as the promise of Elijah and
the coming day of the Lord. (Malachi 4:1–6)
Introduction to Matthew
Introduction to Matthew
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Matthew was probably written in the late 50s or early 60s A.D. Matthew (also
called Levi), the former tax collector who became Jesus’ disciple, is the
author. The original audience may have been the church in Antioch of Syria.
Its members included Jewish and Gentile Christians.
Theme
Matthew tells the story of Jesus of Nazareth, the long-expected Messiah who
brought the kingdom of God to earth.
Purpose
Matthew writes his Gospel to demonstrate that Jesus is the Messiah, that he
has the right to the throne of David as Israel’s true King, and that he is the
ultimate fulfillment of God’s promise to Abraham that his descendants would
be a blessing to all the world (1:1; Gen. 12:1–3). Matthew seeks to encourage
Jewish Christians (and all future disciples) to stand strong despite opposition.
They should feel secure in the knowledge of their citizenship in God’s
kingdom. Matthew shows that Gentiles also can find salvation through Jesus
the Messiah.
Key Themes
1. Portrait of Jesus (1:1, 23; 2:2; 14:33; 16:16; 18:20; 21:5–9).
2. The bridge between Old and New Testaments (1:1–17, 22–23; 2:4–5, 15,
17, 23; 5:17–20).
3. God’s continuing work of salvation within Israel, extended to all the
peoples of the earth through the person and work of Christ (10:5–6;
28:19).
4. The new community of faith (11:28; 16:18–19; 28:19).
5. The church as built and maintained by Jesus’ continuing presence
(16:18; 18:15–20; 22:10; 28:20).
6. A “great commission” for evangelism and mission (28:19).
7. Jesus’ five teachings as a manual on discipleship (chs. 5–7; 10; 13; 18–
20; 24–25).
Outline
I. The Arrival of Jesus the Messiah (1:1–2:23)
II. John the Baptist Prepares for the Messianic Kingdom (3:1–17)
III. Jesus the Messiah Begins to Advance the Messianic Kingdom (4:1–25)
IV . The Authoritative Message of the Messiah: Kingdom Life for His
Disciples (5:1–7:29)
V . The Authoritative Power of the Messiah: Kingdom Power Demonstrated
(8:1–9:38)
VI. The Authoritative Mission of the Messiah’s Messengers (10:1–42)
VII. Opposition to the Messiah Increases (11:1–12:50)
VIII. The Messianic Kingdom Revealed in Parables (13:1–53)
IX. The Identity of the Messiah Revealed (13:54–16:20)
X. The Suffering of the Messiah Revealed (16:21–17:27)
XI. The Community of the Messiah Revealed (18:1–20:34)
XII. The Messiah Asserts His Authority over Jerusalem (21:1–23:39)
XIII. The Delay, Return, and Judgment of the Messiah (24:1–25:46)
XIV . The Crucified Messiah (26:1–27:66)
XV . The Resurrection and Commission of the Messiah (28:1–20)
The Setting of Matthew
The events in the book of Matthew take place almost entirely within the
vicinity of Palestine, an area extending roughly from Caesarea Philippi in the
north to Beersheba in the south. During this time it was ruled by the Roman
Empire. The opening chapters describe events surrounding Jesus’ birth in
Judea, where Herod had been appointed king by the Romans. The closing
chapters end with Jesus’ death, resurrection, and ascension during the rule of
Pontius Pilate and the tetrarchs Antipas and Philip.
The Global Message of Matthew
Jesus Christ is the climax of the Bible and of all of human history. He
brings the whole Old Testament to fulfillment, and he is also the means by
which salvation floods out to the nations. Matthew’s Gospel thus has much
to say to the global church today as God’s people, comprised of both Jew
and Gentile, seek to “make disciples of all nations” (Matt. 28:19).
Matthew and Redemptive History
The purpose of creation was that mankind, made in God’s image as his
ruling representatives, might be fruitful and multiply and spread God’s
glory throughout the earth. This quest was repeatedly hijacked by sin,
however, throughout the Old Testament. After Adam and Eve sinned, Noah
was called by God to be fruitful and multiply, thereby assuming the mantle
of spreading divine blessing (Gen. 9:1). After Noah ended his life in shame
(Gen. 9:20–23), God called Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to carry this mantle
(Gen. 12:1–3; 15:5; 17:2; 22:17–18; 28:14; 35:11). Yet they too proved to
be sinners, and unequal to the task. The nation of Israel, led by Moses, was
also called to be fruitful and multiply (Deut. 6:3; 7:13), but it too failed in
this worldwide mandate.
But at what proved to be the center of human history, God sent a Second
Adam, a new Moses, a true Israel, to spread divine glory throughout the
earth. This was Jesus Christ. He was called God’s “Son” just as Adam and
Israel had been called God’s “son” (Luke 3:38; Ex. 4:22–23). This,
however, was the personally divine Son of God, now incarnate, who
gloriously succeeded in his mission. Indeed, he was the perfect prophet,
priest, and king who succeeded where all the previous prophets, priests, and
kings had failed. As he tells the story of this second Adam, Matthew
connects his Gospel account to the Old Testament more frequently and
more explicitly than any other Gospel writer. He repeatedly sees Jesus as
the one who “fulfills” the promises of the Old Testament (e.g., Matt. 4:14–
16; 8:17; 12:17–21; 26:54, 56; 27:9). And beyond explicit connections of
Jesus to individual promises of the Old Testament, Matthew structures his
whole Gospel in this way. Jesus gives five extended discourses, for
example, echoing the five books of Moses—with whom Jesus also
explicitly links himself (5:17–48).
In presenting Jesus as the fulfillment of the Old Testament, Matthew
shows that Jesus is the one through whom God’s original blessings of
creation are to spill forth to the world. Perhaps the commission of Genesis
1:28 to be fruitful and multiply throughout the whole earth is in the back of
Jesus’ mind in his own commission to his disciples to fruitfully multiply
disciples throughout the whole earth (Matt. 28:18–20).
Universal Themes in Matthew
The new family of God. The new community of faith is not defined by
lineage from ethnic Israel. Rather, the new community transcends ethnic
boundary markers and is defined by trusting faith in the Messiah, the
coming king, Jesus. Jesus extends mercy to Gentiles (Matt. 12:18, 21) even
as his own Jewish kinsmen are hard-hearted and resistant to the gospel (e.g.,
23:1–39). The blessing that was intended to spread to the nations in the Old
Testament finds realization in Jesus, who creates a new family of God
composed of men and women from every tribe and people group and
nation.
The global dimensions of discipleship. “All authority in heaven and on
earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations”
(Matt. 28:18–19). The final charge to his disciples, built on the full
authority (28:18) and everlasting presence (28:20) of Jesus, is to make
disciples of all nations. The Christian gospel is not for a certain culture or
class; it is not a parochial or regional gospel. It is a gospel for all, in
fulfillment of God’s original call and promise to Abraham that in him “all
the families of the earth shall be blessed” (Gen. 12:3).
The dawning of the kingdom and the coming new earth. Throughout
Matthew, Jesus declares that the kingdom of heaven is dawning (Matt. 3:2;
4:17; 10:7; 11:12; 13:44–46). This is a worldwide kingdom, into which all
people around the world are invited (24:14). And one day the
consummation of this kingdom will be complete: explaining to his disciples
what it takes to enter the kingdom of heaven, Jesus expressed the hope of a
completely restored new earth, covering the globe as a fully restored and
undefileable new Eden: “Truly, I say to you, in the new world, when the
Son of Man will sit on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will
also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel” (19:28). The
Greek word here translated “new world” means “renewal” or
“regeneration” (see Titus 3:5, the only other place this word is used in the
New Testament). Here it refers to the total rebirth that the cosmos will
undergo upon Christ’s return. No corner of creation will go un-restored. In
Jesus the kingdom of heaven has dawned, and its final fulfillment is sure.
The Global Message of Matthew for Today
With Jesus, the dawning of the kingdom means that the curse of Genesis 3
has been dealt a decisive blow and the diseased fallenness of the world is
beginning to lift. Matthew shows Jesus calming storms, rebuking demons,
healing sickness, teaching his disciples, and cleansing the temple, all in
fulfillment of Old Testament messianic hopes of a coming deliverer. In all
of this, Jesus is ushering in the kingdom of heaven. He is reversing the
curse of the fall (Gen. 3:14–19). The world is being restored to the way it
was meant to be.
As Christians around the globe find themselves embattled with the effects
of the fall—Satanic warfare, political oppression and corruption, economic
adversity, dysfunctional family relationships, infant mortality, large-scale
hunger, shortage of clean water—we are reminded from Matthew’s Gospel
that amid all the darkness, light shines. And this light, though often
repressed, must one day encompass the whole earth as Christ returns in
final victory over sin, death, and Satan (Rev. 21:1–22:5). In the meantime, it
is the church’s privilege to spread the love of Christ not only through word
(for the next life) but also through deed (for this life), as the parable of the
final judgment makes plain (Matt. 25:31–46).
Above all, global Christians remember the final three chapters of
Matthew’s Gospel, in which the entire account climaxes. Here we see Jesus
not only defeating Satan by casting demons out of people but defeating
Satan by stealing his power of accusation: Jesus bears the punishment his
people deserve, so that Satan can no longer accuse them. Here the Lamb of
God is forsaken so that his people around the world and down through
history, despite their sin, will never be forsaken (Matt. 27:46). Here the
temple curtain is torn in two from top to bottom, because the way is now
open for God’s people to meet with God openly and boldly—wherever they
live, rather than only in Jerusalem (see Acts 1:8).
The kingdom has dawned (Matt. 3:2). The new world is coming (19:28).
All authority is Christ’s (28:18). Let us go and make disciples of all nations
(28:19).
The Genealogy of Jesus Christ