MARK 12 [†] b And he began to speak to them in parables. “A man planted
c a vineyard d and put a fence around it and dug a pit for the winepress and
built a tower, and e leased it to tenants and f went into another country.
2When the season came, he sent a servant [1] to the tenants to get from them
some of the fruit of the vineyard. 3[†] g And they took him and beat him and
sent him away empty-handed. 4 g Again h he sent to them another servant,
and i they struck him on the head and j treated him shamefully.
5 g And he
sent another, and him they killed. And so with many others: some they beat,
and some they killed. 6[†]He had still one other, k a beloved son. l Finally
he sent him to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’ 7[†]But those
tenants said to one another, m ‘This is the heir. Come, n let us kill him, and
the inheritance will be ours.’ 8And they took him and killed him and o threw
him out of the vineyard. 9[†]What will the owner of the vineyard do? p He
will q come and destroy the tenants and r give the vineyard to others.
10[†] s Have you not read t this Scripture:
u “‘The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone; [2]
11 this was the Lord’s doing,
and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
12And v they were seeking to arrest him w but feared the people, for they
perceived that he had told the parable against them. So they x left him and
went away.
Paying Taxes to Caesar
13[†] y And they sent to him some of z the Pharisees and some of z the
Herodians, to a trap him in his talk. 14[†]And they came and said to him,
“Teacher, b we know that you are true and do not care about anyone’s
opinion. For c you are not swayed by appearances, [3] but truly teach d the
way of God. Is it lawful to pay e taxes to f Caesar, or not? Should we pay
them, or should we not?” 15But, knowing g their hypocrisy, he said to them,
“Why h put me to the test? Bring me i a denarius [4] and let me look at it.”
16[†]And they brought one. And he said to them, “Whose likeness and
inscription is this?” They said to him, “Caesar’s.” 17[†]Jesus said to them,
j “Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that
are God’s.” And they marveled at him.
The Sadducees Ask About the Resurrection
18[†]And k Sadducees came to him, l who say that there is no resurrection.
And they asked him a question, saying, 19“Teacher, Moses wrote for us that
m if a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife, but leaves no child, the man [5]
must take the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.
20There were
seven brothers; the first took a wife, and when he died left no offspring.
21And the second took her, and died, leaving no offspring. And the third
likewise. 22And the seven left no offspring. Last of all the woman also died.
23In the resurrection, when they rise again, whose wife will she be? For the
seven had her as wife.”
24Jesus said to them, “Is this not the reason you are wrong, because n you
know neither the Scriptures nor o the power of God? 25[†]For when they
rise from the dead, they neither p marry nor p are given in marriage, but are
like angels in heaven. 26[†]And as for the dead being raised, q have you not
read in r the book of Moses, in s the passage about the bush, how God
spoke to him, saying, t ‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob’? 27He is not God of the dead, but of the living. You
are quite wrong.”
The Great Commandment
28[†] u And one of the scribes came up and heard them disputing with one
another, and seeing that he answered them well, asked him, “Which
commandment is the most important of all?” 29Jesus answered, “The most
important is, v ‘Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, w the Lord is one. 30And
you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul
and with all your mind and with all your strength.’ 31 x The second is this:
y ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other
commandment z greater than these.” 32And the scribe said to him, “You are
right, Teacher. You have truly said that w he is one, and a there is no other
besides him. 33And to love him with all the heart and with all b the
understanding and with all the strength, and to love one’s neighbor as
oneself, c is much more than all d whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
34[†]And when Jesus saw that he answered wisely, he said to him, “You are
not far from the kingdom of God.” e And after that no one dared to ask him
any more questions.
Whose Son Is the Christ?
35[†] f And as g Jesus taught in the temple, he said, “How can the scribes say
that h the Christ is the son of David? 36David himself, i in the Holy Spirit,
declared,
j “‘The Lord said to my Lord,
“Sit at my right hand,
until I put your enemies k under your feet.”’
37David himself calls him Lord. So l how is he his son?” And the great
throng m heard him gladly.
Beware of the Scribes
38[†] n And in his teaching he said, “Beware of the scribes, who like to walk
around in long robes and like greetings in the marketplaces 39and have the
best seats in the synagogues and o the places of honor at feasts, 40 p who
devour widows’ houses and q for a pretense make long prayers. They will
receive the greater condemnation.”
The Widow’s Offering
41 r And he sat down opposite s the treasury and watched the people t putting
money into the offering box. Many rich people put in large sums. 42[†]And
a poor widow came and put in two u small copper coins, which make a
penny. [6] 43And he called his disciples to him and said to them, “Truly, I
say to you, v this poor widow has put in more than all those who are
contributing to the offering box. 44For they all contributed out of their
abundance, but she out of her w poverty has put in everything she had, all
x she had to live on.”
Jesus Foretells Destruction of the Temple