MARK 13 [†] y And as he came out of the temple, one of his disciples said to
him, “Look, Teacher, what wonderful stones and what wonderful
buildings!” 2[†]And Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings?
z There will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown
down.”
Signs of the Close of the Age
3[†]And as he sat on a the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, b Peter and
James and John and c Andrew asked him d privately,
4[†]“Tell us, e when
will these things be, and what will be the sign when all these things are
about to be accomplished?” 5And Jesus began to say to them, f “See that no
one leads you astray.
6
g Many will come in my name, saying, h ‘I am he!’
and they will lead many astray.
7And when you hear of wars and rumors of
wars, i do not be alarmed. This j must take place, but the end is not yet.
8[†]For k nation will rise against nation, and l kingdom against kingdom.
There will be m earthquakes in various places; there will be n famines.
These are but the beginning of the birth pains.
9 o “But p be on your guard. For they will deliver you over to councils,
and you will be beaten q in synagogues, and you will stand before
r governors and s kings for my sake, t to bear witness before them. 10And
the gospel must first be proclaimed u to all nations. 11And when they bring
you to trial and deliver you over, v do not be anxious beforehand what you
are to say, but say w whatever is given you in that hour, x for it is not you
who speak, but the Holy Spirit. 12 y And brother will deliver brother over to
death, and the father his child, and children will rise against parents and
have them put to death. 13
z And you will be hated by all for my name’s
sake. a But the one who endures to the end will be saved.
The Abomination of Desolation
14[†]“But when you see b the abomination of desolation standing where he
ought not to be ( c let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea
flee to the mountains. 15 d Let the one who is on e the housetop not go down,
nor enter his house, to take anything out, 16and let the one who is in the
field not turn back to take his cloak. 17And f alas for women who are
pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those days! 18Pray that it
may not happen in winter.
19[†]For in those days there will be g such
h tribulation as has not been i from the beginning of the creation that j God
created until now, and never will be. 20[†]And if the Lord had not cut short
the days, no human being would be saved. But for k the sake of the elect,
whom l he chose, he shortened the days. 21And m then if anyone says to
you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘Look, there he is!’ do not believe it.
22[†] n For false christs and false prophets will arise and o perform signs and
wonders, p to lead astray, if possible, q the elect. 23But r be on guard; s I
have told you all things beforehand.
The Coming of the Son of Man
24[†]“But in those days, after t that tribulation, u the sun will be darkened,
and the moon will not give its light, 25and v the stars will be falling from
heaven, and the powers in the heavens will be shaken. 26And then they will
see w the Son of Man coming in clouds x with great power and glory.
27And
then y he will send out the angels and z gather a his elect from b the four
winds, from c the ends of the earth d to the ends of heaven.
The Lesson of the Fig Tree
28[†]“From the fig tree learn its lesson: as soon as its branch becomes
tender and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near.
29So also,
when you see these things taking place, you know that he is near, e at the
very gates. 30[†] f Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until
all these things take place. 31[†] g Heaven and earth will pass away, but h my
words will not pass away.
No One Knows That Day or Hour
32[†]“But concerning that day or that hour, i no one knows, not even the
angels in heaven, j nor the Son, k but only the Father.
33[†] l Be on guard,
m keep awake. [1] For you do not know when the time will come. 34 n It is
like a man o going on a journey, when he leaves home and puts his
servants [2] in charge, p each with his work, and commands q the doorkeeper
to stay awake. 35 r Therefore stay awake—for you do not know when the
master of the house will come, s in the evening, or s at midnight, or t when
the rooster crows, [3] or u in the morning— 36lest v he come suddenly and
w find you asleep. 37And what I say to you I say to all: r Stay awake.”
The Plot to Kill Jesus