MARK 4 [†]Again v he began to teach beside the sea. And a very large
crowd gathered about him, w so that he got into a boat and sat in it on the
sea, and the whole crowd was beside the sea on the land. 2And x he was
teaching them many things in parables, and in his teaching he said to them:
3[†]“Listen! y Behold, a sower went out to sow.
4And as he sowed, some
seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it. 5Other seed fell
on rocky ground, where it did not have much soil, and immediately it
sprang up, since it had no depth of soil. 6And z when the sun rose, it was
scorched, and since it had no root, a it withered away.
7Other seed fell
among b thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no
grain. 8[†]And other seeds fell into good soil and produced grain, growing
up and increasing and yielding thirtyfold and sixtyfold and c a
hundredfold.” 9[†]And he said, d “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
The Purpose of the Parables
10And e when he was alone, those around him with the twelve asked him
about the parables. 11[†]And he said to them, f “To you has been given g the
secret of the kingdom of God, but for h those outside everything is in
parables, 12[†] i so that
“they j may indeed see but not perceive,
and may indeed hear but not understand,
lest they k should turn and be forgiven.”
13[†] l And he said to them, “Do you not understand this parable? How then
will you understand all the parables? 14
m The sower sows n the word. 15And
these are the ones along the path, where the word is sown: when they hear,
Satan immediately comes and takes away the word that is sown in them.
16And these are the ones sown on rocky ground: the ones who, when they
hear the word, immediately receive it o with joy.
17And they have no root in
themselves, but p endure for a while; then, when tribulation or persecution
arises on account of the word, immediately q they fall away. [1] 18And others
are the ones sown among thorns. They are those who hear the word, 19but
r the cares of s the world and t the deceitfulness of riches and the desires for
other things enter in and choke the word, and it proves unfruitful. 20But
those that were sown on the good soil are the ones who hear the word and
accept it and u bear fruit, v thirtyfold and sixtyfold and a hundredfold.”
A Lamp Under a Basket
21[†] w And he said to them, x “Is a lamp brought in to be put under a basket,
or under a bed, and not on a stand? 22 y For nothing is hidden except to be
made manifest; nor is anything secret except to come to light. 23[†] z If
anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.” 24[†]And he said to them, “Pay
attention to what you hear: a with the measure you use, it will be measured
to you, and still more will be added to you. 25 b For to the one who has,
more will be given, and from the one who has not, even what he has will be
taken away.”
The Parable of the Seed Growing
26[†]And he said, c “The kingdom of God is as if a man should scatter seed
on the ground. 27He sleeps and rises night and day, and the seed sprouts and
grows; d he knows not how.
28The earth produces by itself, first the blade,
then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
29[†]But when the grain is ripe, at
once e he puts in the sickle, because the harvest has come.”
The Parable of the Mustard Seed
30[†] f And he said, “With what can we compare the kingdom of God, or
what parable shall we use for it? 31It is like g a grain of mustard seed,
which, when sown on the ground, is the smallest of all the seeds on earth,
32yet when it is sown it grows up and becomes larger than all the garden
plants and puts out large branches, so that the birds of the air can make
nests in its shade.”
33 h With many such parables he spoke i the word to them, j as they were
able to hear it. 34[†]He did not speak to them k without a parable, but
l privately to his own disciples he m explained everything.
Jesus Calms a Storm
35 n On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, “Let us go across
to the other side.” 36[†]And leaving the crowd, they took him with them in
the boat, just as he was. And other boats were with him. 37[†]And a great
windstorm arose, and the waves o were breaking into the boat, so that the
boat was already filling. 38[†]But he was in the stern, asleep on the cushion.
And they woke him and said to him, “Teacher, do you not care that we are
perishing?” 39[†]And he awoke and p rebuked the wind and said to the sea,
“Peace! Be still!” And the wind ceased, and q there was a great calm.
40[†]He said to them, “Why are you r so afraid? Have you still no faith?”
41And they were filled with great fear and said to one another, s “Who then
is this, that even t the wind and the sea obey him?”
Jesus Heals a Man with a Demon
MARK 5 u They came to the other side of the sea, to the country of the
Gerasenes. [1] 2And when Jesus [2] had stepped out of the boat, immediately
there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit. 3 v He lived
among the tombs. And no one could bind him anymore, not even with a
chain, 4for he had often been bound with shackles and chains, but he
wrenched the chains apart, and he broke the shackles in pieces. No one had
the strength to subdue him. 5Night and day among the tombs and on the
mountains he was always crying out and cutting himself with stones.
6[†]And when he saw Jesus from afar, he ran and w fell down before him.
7And x crying out with a loud voice, he said, “What have you to do with
me, Jesus, y Son of z the Most High God? a I adjure you by God, do not
torment me.” 8[†]For he was saying to him, “Come out of the man, you
unclean spirit!” 9[†]And Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” He replied,
“My name is b Legion, for we are many.” 10And he begged him earnestly
not to send them out of the country.
11[†]Now a great herd of pigs was
feeding there on the hillside, 12and they begged him, saying, “Send us to the
pigs; let us enter them.” 13[†]So he gave them permission. And the unclean
spirits came out and entered the pigs; and the herd, numbering about two
thousand, rushed down the steep bank into the sea and drowned in the sea.
14The herdsmen fled and told it in the city and in the country. And people
came to see what it was that had happened. 15[†]And they came to Jesus
and saw the demon-possessed [3] man, the one who had had c the legion,
sitting there, d clothed and in his right mind, and they were afraid. 16And
those who had seen it described to them what had happened to the demon-
possessed man and to the pigs. 17And e they began to beg Jesus [4] to depart
from their region. 18[†]As he was getting into the boat, the man who had
been possessed with demons begged him that he might be with him. 19And
he did not permit him but said to him, “Go home to your friends and f tell
them how much the Lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on
you.” 20And he went away and began to proclaim in g the Decapolis how
much Jesus had done for him, and everyone marveled.
Jesus Heals a Woman and Jairus’s Daughter
21[†]And when Jesus had crossed again in the boat to the other side, a great
crowd gathered about him, and he was beside the sea. 22[†] h Then came one
of i the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, and seeing him, he fell at
his feet 23and implored him earnestly, saying, “My little daughter is at the
point of death. Come and j lay your hands on her, so that she may be made
well and live.” 24And he went with him.
And a great crowd followed him and k thronged about him. 25[†]And
there was a woman l who had had a discharge of blood for twelve years,
26and who had suffered much under many physicians, and had spent all that
she had, and was no better but rather grew worse. 27She had heard the
reports about Jesus and came up behind him in the crowd and touched his
garment. 28For she said, “If I touch even his garments, I will be made well.”
29 m And immediately the flow of blood dried up, and she felt in her body
that she was healed of her n disease. 30And Jesus, perceiving in himself that
o power had gone out from him, immediately turned about in the crowd and
said, “Who touched my garments?” 31[†]And his disciples said to him,
“You see the crowd pressing around you, and yet you say, ‘Who touched
me?’” 32And he looked around to see who had done it. 33But the woman,
knowing what had happened to her, came in fear and trembling and fell
down before him and told him the whole truth. 34[†]And he said to her,
“Daughter, p your faith has made you well; p go in peace, and be healed of
your n disease.”
35[†]While he was still speaking, there came from q the ruler’s house
some who said, “Your daughter is dead. Why r trouble s the Teacher any
further?” 36[†]But overhearing [5] what they said, Jesus said to q the ruler of
the synagogue, “Do not fear, only believe.” 37[†]And he allowed no one to
follow him except t Peter and James and u John the brother of James.
38[†]They came to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and Jesus [6] saw
a commotion, people weeping and wailing loudly.
39And when he had
entered, he said to them, v “Why are you making a commotion and
weeping? The child is not dead but w sleeping.” 40And they laughed at him.
But he x put them all outside and took the child’s father and mother and
those who were with him and went in where the child was. 41[†] y Taking
her by the hand he said to her, “Talitha cumi,” which means, “Little girl, I
say to you, z arise.” 42And immediately the girl got up and began walking
(for she was twelve years of age), and they were immediately overcome
with amazement. 43[†]And a he strictly charged them that no one should
know this, and told them to give her something to eat.
Jesus Rejected at Nazareth