MARK 7 [†] p Now when the Pharisees gathered to him, with some of the
scribes q who had come from Jerusalem, 2they saw that some of his
disciples ate with hands that were r defiled, that is, unwashed. 3(For the
Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their hands
properly, [1] holding to s the tradition of t the elders, 4and when they come
from the marketplace, they do not eat unless they wash. [2] And there are
many other traditions that they observe, such as u the washing of v cups and
pots and copper vessels and dining couches. [3]) 5[†]And the Pharisees and
the scribes asked him, “Why do your disciples not walk according to s the
tradition of t the elders, w but eat with r defiled hands?” 6And he said to
them, “Well did Isaiah prophesy of you x hypocrites, as it is written,
y “‘This people honors me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me;
7 in vain do they worship me,
teaching as z doctrines the commandments of men.’
8You leave the commandment of God and hold to the tradition of men.”
9And he said to them, “You have a fine way of a rejecting the
commandment of God in order to establish your tradition! 10[†]For Moses
said, b ‘Honor your father and your mother’; and, c ‘Whoever reviles father
or mother must surely die.’ 11But you say, ‘If a man tells his father or his
mother, “Whatever you would have gained from me is Corban”’ (that is,
given to God) [4]—
12then you no longer permit him to do anything for his
father or mother,
13thus d making void the word of God by your tradition
that you have handed down. And many such things you do.”
What Defiles a Person
14And he called the people to him again and said to them, e “Hear me, all of
you, and understand: 15[†] f There is nothing outside a person that by going
into him can defile him, but the things that come out of a person are what
defile him.” [5] 17And when he had entered g the house and left the people,
h his disciples asked him about the parable. 18And he said to them, “Then
i are you also without understanding? Do you not see that whatever goes
into a person from outside cannot defile him, 19[†]since it enters not his
heart j but his stomach, and is expelled?” [6] ( k Thus he declared all foods
clean.) 20And he said, l “What comes out of a person is what defiles him.
21For from within, out of the heart of man, come evil thoughts, sexual
immorality, theft, m murder, adultery,
22coveting, wickedness, deceit,
n sensuality, o envy, p slander, q pride, r foolishness. 23 s All these evil things
come from within, and they defile a person.”
The Syrophoenician Woman’s Faith
24[†]And from there he arose and went away to the region of Tyre and
Sidon. [7] And he entered a house and did not want anyone to know, yet he
could not be hidden. 25But immediately a woman whose little daughter had
an unclean spirit heard of him and came and fell down at his feet.
26[†] t Now the woman was a u Gentile, v a Syrophoenician by birth. And
she begged him to cast the demon out of her daughter.
27[†]And he said to
her, “Let the children be w fed first, for it is not right to take the children’s
bread and x throw it to the dogs.” 28[†]But she answered him, “Yes, Lord;
yet even the dogs under the table eat the children’s y crumbs.” 29And he said
to her, “For this statement you may z go your way; the demon has left your
daughter.” 30And she went home and found the child lying in bed and the
demon gone.
Jesus Heals a Deaf Man
31[†] a Then he returned from the region of Tyre and went through Sidon to
b the Sea of Galilee, in the region of the c Decapolis. 32And they brought to
him d a man who was deaf and d had a speech impediment, and they begged
him to e lay his hand on him. 33[†]And f taking him aside from the crowd
privately, he put his fingers into his ears, and f after spitting touched his
tongue. 34And g looking up to heaven, h he sighed and said to him,
“Ephphatha,” that is, “Be opened.” 35 d And his ears were opened, his
tongue was released, and he spoke plainly.
36[†]And i Jesus [8] charged them
to tell no one. But j the more he charged them, the more zealously they
proclaimed it. 37And they were k astonished beyond measure, saying, “He
has done all things well. He even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak.”
Jesus Feeds the Four Thousand