MARK 11 [†] i Now when they drew near to Jerusalem, to j Bethphage and
Bethany, at k the Mount of Olives, Jesus [1] sent l two of his disciples
2[†]and said to them, “Go into the village in front of you, and immediately
as you enter it you will find a colt tied, m on which no one has ever sat.
Untie it and bring it. 3If anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say,
‘The Lord has need of it and will send it back here immediately.’” 4And
they went away and found a colt tied at a door outside in the street, and they
untied it. 5And some of those standing there said to them, “What are you
doing, untying the colt?” 6And they told them what Jesus had said, and they
let them go. 7[†]And they brought the colt to Jesus and threw their cloaks
on it, and he sat on it. 8[†]And many n spread their cloaks on the road, and
others spread leafy branches that they had cut from the fields. 9[†]And those
who went before and those who followed were shouting, o “Hosanna!
p Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! 10Blessed is q the
coming r kingdom of s our father r David! o Hosanna t in the highest!”
11[†] u And he entered Jerusalem and went into the temple. And when he
had looked around at everything, as it was already late, v he went out to
Bethany with the twelve.
Jesus Curses the Fig Tree
12[†] w On the following day, when they came from Bethany, x he was
hungry.
13[†] y And seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf, he went to see if
he could find anything on it. When he came to it, he found nothing but
leaves, for z it was not the season for figs. 14And he said to it, “May no one
ever eat fruit from you again.” And his disciples heard it.
Jesus Cleanses the Temple
15[†] a And they came to Jerusalem. And he entered the temple and began to
drive out those who sold and those who bought in the temple, and he
overturned the tables of b the money-changers and the seats of those who
sold c pigeons. 16And he would not allow anyone to carry anything through
the temple. 17And he was teaching them and saying to them, “Is it not
written, d ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations’?
But e you have made it a den of robbers.” 18[†]And the chief priests and the
scribes heard it and f were seeking a way to destroy him, for they feared
him, because g all the crowd was astonished at his teaching. 19 h And when
evening came they [2] went out of the city.
The Lesson from the Withered Fig Tree
20[†] i As they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered away
to its roots. 21[†]And Peter remembered and said to him, j “Rabbi, look! The
fig tree that you cursed has withered.” 22[†]And Jesus answered them,
“Have k faith in God. 23 l Truly, I say to you, whoever says to this mountain,
m ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not n doubt in his heart,
but o believes that what he says will come to pass, it will be done for him.
24[†]Therefore I tell you, p whatever you ask in prayer, o believe that you
q have received [3] it, and it will be yours. 25And whenever r you stand
praying, s forgive, t if you have anything against anyone, so that u your
Father also who is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.” [4]
The Authority of Jesus Challenged
27 v And they came again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the
temple, the chief priests and the scribes and the elders came to him,
28[†]and they said to him, w “By what authority are you doing these things,
or who gave you this authority to do them?” 29Jesus said to them, “I will
ask you one question; answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do
these things. 30Was the baptism of John x from heaven or from man?
Answer me.” 31And they discussed it with one another, saying, “If we say,
‘From heaven,’ he will say, y ‘Why then did you not believe him?’ 32But
shall we say, ‘From man’?”— z they were afraid of the people, for they all
held that John really was a a prophet. 33So they answered Jesus, “We do not
know.” And Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I
do these things.”
The Parable of the Tenants