MATTHEW 25 [†]“Then the kingdom of heaven will be like d ten virgins
who took their lamps [1] and went to meet e the bridegroom. [2] 2Five of
them were foolish, and five were w wise. 3[†]For when the foolish took their
lamps, they took no oil with them, 4but the wise took flasks of oil with their
lamps. 5As the bridegroom f was delayed, they all became drowsy and slept.
6But g at midnight there was a cry, ‘Here is the bridegroom! Come out to
meet him.’ 7Then all those virgins rose and h trimmed their lamps. 8And the
foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going
out.’ 9But the wise answered, saying, ‘Since there will not be enough for us
and for you, go rather to the dealers and buy for yourselves.’ 10And while
they were going to buy, the bridegroom came, and i those who were ready
went in with him to j the marriage feast, and k the door was shut.
11[†]Afterward the other virgins came also, saying, l ‘Lord, lord, open to
us.’ 12 l But he answered, ‘Truly, I say to you, m I do not know you.’
13[†] n Watch therefore, for you o know neither the day nor the hour.
The Parable of the Talents
14 p “For q it will be like a man r going on a journey, who called his
servants [3] and entrusted to them his property.
15[†]To one he gave five
s talents, [4] to another two, to another one, t to each according to his ability.
Then he r went away.
16He who had received the five talents went at once
and traded with them, and he made five talents more. 17So also he who had
the two talents made two talents more. 18[†]But he who had received the
one talent went and u dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.
19Now
v after a long time the master of those servants came and w settled accounts
with them. 20[†]And he who had received the five talents came forward,
bringing five talents more, saying, ‘Master, you delivered to me five talents;
here I have made five talents more.’ 21His master said to him, ‘Well done,
good and x faithful servant. [5] y You have been faithful over a little; z I will
set you over much. Enter into a the joy of your master.’ 22And he also who
had the two talents came forward, saying, ‘Master, you delivered to me two
talents; here I have made two talents more.’ 23His master said to him, ‘Well
done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a little; I will
set you over much. Enter into the joy of your master.’ 24[†]He also who had
received the one talent came forward, saying, ‘Master, I knew you to be b a
hard man, reaping c where you did not sow, and gathering where you
scattered no seed, 25so I was afraid, and I went and hid your talent in the
ground. Here d you have what is yours.’ 26But his master answered him,
‘You e wicked and e slothful servant! You knew that I reap where I have not
sown and gather where I scattered no seed? 27[†]Then you ought to have
invested my money with the bankers, and at my coming I should have
received what was my own with interest. 28So take the talent from him and
give it to him who has the ten talents. 29[†] f For to everyone who has will
more be given, and he will have an abundance. But from the one who has
not, even what he has will be taken away.
30[†]And g cast h the worthless
servant into the outer darkness. In that place g there will be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.’
The Final Judgment
31[†] i “When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with
him, j then he will sit on his glorious throne. 32[†]Before him k will be
gathered l all the nations, and m he will separate people one from another as
a shepherd separates n the sheep from the goats. 33And he will place the
sheep on his right, but the goats on the left. 34[†]Then o the King will say to
p those on his right, ‘Come, you q who are blessed by my Father, r inherit
s the kingdom t prepared for you u from the foundation of the world. 35For
v I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you w gave me
drink, x I was a stranger and you welcomed me, 36 v I was naked and you
clothed me, y I was sick and you z visited me, a I was in prison and you
came to me.’ 37Then the righteous will answer him, saying, ‘Lord, when did
we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink? 38And when
did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you?
39And when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ 40[†]And b the
King will answer them, c ‘Truly, I say to you, as you did it to one of the
least of these d my brothers, [6] you did it to me.’
41[†]“Then he will say to those on his left, e ‘Depart from me, you
f cursed, into g the eternal fire prepared for h the devil and his angels. 42For
i I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no
drink, 43I was a stranger and you did not welcome me, naked and you did
not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’ 44Then they also
will answer, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a
stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not minister to you?’ 45Then
he will answer them, saying, ‘Truly, I say to you, as you did not do it to one
of the least of these, j you did not do it to me.’ 46And these will go away
k into eternal punishment, but the righteous k into l eternal life.”
The Plot to Kill Jesus