MICAH 7 [†] Woe is me! For I have become
u as when the summer fruit has been gathered,
as when the grapes have been gleaned:
there is no cluster to eat,
no v first-ripe fig that my soul desires.
2 w The godly has perished from the earth,
and x there is no one upright among mankind;
y they all lie in wait for blood,
and z each hunts the other with a net.
3[†] a Their hands are on what is evil, to do it well;
b the prince and c the judge ask for a bribe,
and the great man utters the evil desire of his soul;
thus they weave it together.
4[†] The best of them is d like a brier,
the most upright of them a thorn hedge.
The day of e your watchmen, of your punishment, has come;
f now their confusion is at hand.
5 g Put no trust in a neighbor;
have no confidence in a friend;
guard h the doors of your mouth
from her who lies in your arms; [1]
6 for i the son treats the father with contempt,
the daughter rises up against her mother,
the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law;
j a man’s enemies are the men of his own house.
7[†] But as for me, I will look to the LORD;
k I will wait for the God of my salvation;
my God will hear me.
8[†] l Rejoice not over me, O m my enemy;
n when I fall, I shall rise;
o when I sit in darkness,
the LORD will be a light to me.
9[†] p I will bear the indignation of the LORD
because I have sinned against him,
until q he pleads my cause
and executes judgment for me.
r He will bring me out to the light;
I shall look upon his vindication.
10[†] Then s my enemy will see,
and shame will cover her who t said to me,
“Where is the LORD your God?”
u My eyes will look upon her;
now she will be trampled down
v like the mire of the streets.
11[†] w A day for the building of your walls!
In that day the boundary shall be far extended.
12 In that day they [2] will come to you,
y from Assyria and the cities of Egypt,
and from Egypt to z the River,
a from sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.
13[†] But b the earth will be desolate
because of its inhabitants,
for the fruit of their deeds.
14[†] c Shepherd your people d with your staff,
the flock of your inheritance,
who dwell alone in a forest
e in the midst of f a garden land; [3]
let them graze in Bashan and Gilead
as in the days of old.
15[†] g As in the days when you came out of the land of Egypt,
I will show them [4] marvelous things.
16[†] h The nations shall see and be ashamed of all their might;
i they shall lay their hands on their mouths;
their ears shall be deaf;
17 j they shall lick the dust like a serpent,
like the crawling things of the earth;
k they shall come trembling out of their strongholds;
l they shall turn in dread to the LORD our God,
and they shall be in fear of you.
God’s Steadfast Love and Compassion
18[†] m Who is a God like you, n pardoning iniquity
and passing over transgression
n for the remnant of his inheritance?
o He does not retain his anger forever,
because he delights in steadfast love.
19[†] He will p again have compassion on us;
q he will tread our iniquities underfoot.
r You will cast all our [5] sins
into the depths of the sea.
20[†] s You will show faithfulness to Jacob
and steadfast love to Abraham,
t as you have sworn to our fathers
from the days of old.
Study Notes for Micah
1:1 Superscription. Rather than being identified by his father or family
(compare Joel 1:1; Jonah 1:1), this prophet is identified by a location,
“Micah of Moresheth.” Moresheth was about 22 miles (35 km) southwest
of Jerusalem. Micah is never referred to as “prophet,” but the source of his
power is described as the “Spirit of the LORD” (Mic. 3:8).
FACT
Moresheth, where Micah lived, was a small village 22 miles (35 km)
southwest of Jerusalem. It was one of the many military outposts set up
to secure the kingdom’s borders.
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:2–2:13 The Announcement of Judgment on Israel and
Judah. The first major section describes (1) God’s punishment of Samaria
and Judah (1:2–16); (2) abuses and abusers of Yahweh’s land (2:1–11); and
(3) God’s promise to gather Jacob (2:12–13).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:2 Hear. This verb marks the beginning of each of the
book’s major divisions (1:2; 3:1; 6:1). witness against. The Lord will
provide evidence against Samaria (Mal. 3:5).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:3 Yahweh is coming out for battle (compare Isa. 26:21;
Zech. 14:3). Canaanite shrines were located on high places (see note on 1
Kings 3:2).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:4 mountains will melt. Compare Ps. 97:5; Nah. 1:5.
The undoing of creation forewarns of the undoing of Samaria (Mic. 1:6–7).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:5 Jacob . . . house of Israel. The whole nation will be
judged (2:12; 3:1, 8–9).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:6 I will shows the Lord’s intention to act (vv. 7, 15; 2:3,
12; 4:6–7, 13; 5:10–15; 6:14; 7:15). Samaria a heap. A similar fate awaits
Jerusalem (3:12). uncover her foundations. The judgment of public shame
(compare 4:11; 7:10).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:7 All her carved images . . . wages . . . idols. Yahweh’s
judgment will be extensive. fee of a prostitute. The spiritual infidelity of
the city is like the actions of a prostitute (compare Judg. 2:17; Ezek. 16:33–
36).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:8 go stripped and naked. Wearing sackcloth (Gen.
37:34) and covering one’s head (2 Sam. 15:30) usually signified mourning.
This may be a more intense mourning, or else an image of going into exile
(compare Isa. 20:3–4). jackals . . . ostriches. Judah is pictured as a land
destroyed (Isa. 34:13; Jer. 50:39).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:9 It has reached probably refers to the yet-to-be-
identified “disaster” (v. 12).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:10–15 The names of the towns and the words describing
the disasters sound alike. Micah uses wordplay to reveal the various
disasters Judah will face when its towns are captured by the Assyrians.
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:10 Tell it not in Gath. Micah wants to prevent either
sympathy or rejoicing from outside observers over the coming destruction
(compare 2 Sam. 1:20). Beth-le-aphrah could be translated “House of
Dust.” roll yourselves. Those under judgment must give full expression to
their grief.
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:11 Shaphir sounds like “beautiful” and contrasts with
nakedness and shame. Zaanan sounds like the Hebrew for “come out.” In
fear, the trembling inhabitants do not come out for battle. Beth-ezel
(“House of Taking Away”) expresses lamentation that the village was
“taken away,” that is, destroyed.
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:12 Maroth conveys the concept of bitterness. Thus, a
“bitter” town longs for good. The disaster from Yahweh, who “will come
down” (v. 3), has come down to Jerusalem’s gate (compare v. 9).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:13 The Hebrew for steeds sounds like Lachish.
Ironically, the people are urged to harness horses to chariots not to fight but
to flee.
FACT
Micah’s list of disasters (1:10–15) is based on a series of word plays. For
example, the city name Beth-le-aphrah means “House of Dust,” and its
inhabitants will mourn “in the dust” (1:10). Lachish sounds like “steeds,”
and they will flee on their steeds (1:13).
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:14 Moresheth-gath. The name is associated with the
phrase “one who is betrothed” (Deut. 22:23). Assyria will receive a dowry
(that is, parting gifts), along with the bride (that is, Moresheth-gath).
Achzib sounds like “deceitful” (compare Jer. 15:18). The kings of Israel,
expecting Achzib to provide revenue, will be deceived.
MICAH—NOTE ON 1:15 The Hebrew for conqueror sounds like Mareshah
and is often used to describe Israel’s taking of Canaan. Those who formerly
conquered the Canaanites will now themselves be conquered. glory of
Israel . . . Adullam. David fled to Adullam, where he was pursued by Saul
(1 Sam. 22:1; 2 Sam. 23:13). Now David’s descendants likewise flee from a
hostile conqueror.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:1 in the power of their hand. Attention shifts from
cities and people to those who do evil because they have the authority and
ability to carry out their schemes.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:2 covet . . . seize . . . take . . . oppress. Taking land and
property (his inheritance) from the weak was a violation of the covenant
(Ex. 20:17) and a primary reason for judgment against Ahab’s house (1
Kings 21; see Mic. 6:16).
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:3 against this family. The entire community is
accountable for the sins of its leaders. a time of disaster. See Amos 5:13.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:4 taunt song. These oppressors had seized property
from the defenseless (vv. 1–2). Now the apostate (the Assyrians?) will
seize their land and they will be mocked for their losses.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:5 you will have none. The dishonest land-grabbers are
excluded from the inheritance they denied to others (v. 2).
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:7 The people thought that a God of grace could never
bring the disaster mentioned in vv. 3–5.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:8–9 These acts are similar to the abuses detailed in vv.
1–5. my people . . . an enemy. The accusation of hostility is supported by
three examples of enemy-like conduct in war.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:10 Arise and go . . . no place to rest. The uncleanness
of their injustice has denied rest to others, and so the Lord demands that the
people be exiled from their own place of rest.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:11 preach . . . of wine. The people welcomed
“preaching” that emphasized overindulgence. They did not want to hear that
they were violating God’s standards.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:12–13 The first main section ends with the Shepherd of
Israel gathering his sheep into the protective fold and leading them out as
their triumphant King.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:12 assemble . . . gather . . . set . . . like sheep. The
descriptive actions portray Yahweh as a protective shepherd.
MICAH—NOTE ON 2:13 opens the breach. The picture shifts to a king
leading his army out (they break through) from an enclosed city. king . . .
before them . . . LORD. The identity of the Shepherd-King who leads the
people into battle is fully revealed.
3:1–5:15 The Present Injustice and the Future Prospect of Just Rule in
Jerusalem. The second section focuses on the corrupt leadership in the
house of Israel (3:1–12). Jerusalem’s restoration among the nations is
promised (4:1–7) and accomplished (4:8–5:15).
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:1–2a Is it not for you to know justice? Those given
judicial responsibility should delight in God’s law and understand what is
right.
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:2b–3 tear . . . eat . . . flay . . . break . . . chop. The
imagery of cannibalism symbolizes the destructive violence of the leaders
against the oppressed (compare Ps. 14:4; 27:2; Prov. 30:14).
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:4 he will not answer . . . he will hide his face. As part
of their fair sentence, those who would not hear the cries of the people will
now find that God will not hear them.
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:5 Peace . . . war. Profit-seeking prophets proclaim that
all is well, as long as they receive what they ask for.
FACT
The business of prophecy. The life of a prophet was not an easy one, and
few could carry out its rigorous demands. False prophets, however, could
do very well for themselves because they charged money for their
prophecies. Not surprisingly, these “paid prophecies” usually favored the
person paying for them (3:5).
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:6–7 no answer from God. God does not give his word
to the false prophets. As with the civil leaders (v. 4), God’s silence is part of
their sentence.
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:8 But as for me distinguishes Micah and his unpopular
message from that of the false prophets.
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:9–12 This third oracle of judgment adds priests to the
previously addressed civil rulers (vv. 1–4) and false prophets (vv. 5–8).
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:9 detest justice. The rulers were supposed to know and
do justice (compare vv. 1, 8), but instead they find it repulsive. make
crooked. These judicial leaders make corrupt decisions.
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:11 heads . . . priests . . . prophets. All the leaders give
the people the results they desire, in exchange for payment. lean on the
LORD. They expect God to save them, even though they are living sinful
lives.
MICAH—NOTE ON 3:12 because of you. As the leaders had built Jerusalem
with injustice and violent acts (v. 10), so they are responsible for its
“unbuilding.” mountain of the house. This sets up a contrast with
“mountain of the house of the LORD” (4:1). The temple without the Lord’s
presence is simply a structure on a hill.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:1–7 Jerusalem and its temple, once destroyed (3:12), are
exalted as a source of instruction, justice, and righteousness (4:1–5). The
weak become strong under Yahweh’s rule (vv. 6–7). Verses 1–5 are almost
identical to Isa. 2:1–5.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:1 in the latter days. Micah envisions a new era in
which Jerusalem’s fortunes are reversed. See note on Isa. 2:2 for the time of
“the latter days.” shall flow to it. Rather than streaming to false gods
(compare Jer. 51:44), the nations will worship the Lord.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:2 out of Zion shall go forth the law. The teaching of
God’s ways will go from Jerusalem to all nations.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:3 They shall beat their swords into plowshares looks
forward to a time “in the latter days” (v. 1) when armies or weapons are no
longer needed (see note on Isa. 2:4).
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:4 vine . . . fig tree. A key OT image of peace and
prosperity (compare 1 Kings 4:25; Zech. 3:10). The military title LORD of
hosts (that is, of armies) emphasizes God’s power to bring about these
events.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:5 but we will walk . . . forever. In contrast to the pagan
nations, the people of God walk together, united to their King (v. 2).
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:6–7 God promises to gather his exiled people to Zion,
where they will submit to him as their King. In that day. See v. 1; 5:10.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:8–5:15 As the kingdom is established (4:8), the focus
moves from distress and salvation (4:9–5:1) to messianic intervention and
victory (5:2–6). The remnant both blesses and curses the nations (5:7–9),
and the Lord obliterates idolatries from his people (5:10–15).
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:8 tower of the flock . . . former dominion. As David
ruled from Jerusalem, so a new king will rule once more. daughter of Zion.
Jeru­ salem’s inhabitants.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:9 Is there no king in you? Human kings cannot save
the people.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:11 nations are assembled. The specific setting is
probably the Assyrian attack in 701 B.C. (see 5:5). defiled . . . gaze. The
gathered forces express their desire to defile Jerusalem’s holy temple and
expose it to public scorn.
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:12 his plan . . . he has gathered. The nations have
assembled themselves (v. 11), and yet it is Yahweh who brings them to his
threshing floor. War is pictured as a harvest, which is often a picture of
judgment (e.g., Jer. 51:33; Matt. 13:30; Rev. 14:15).
MICAH—NOTE ON 4:13 Arise and thresh. Zion is pictured as an invincible
ox treading grain. Lord of the whole earth. The Lord controls everything.
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:1–15 A new hope for Israel, and for the whole world,
comes by means of a new David. His deeds are praised (vv. 1–6) and the
influence of the Israelite remnant among the nations is described (vv. 7–9).
The chapter concludes with the Lord removing all the idols his people had
worshiped (vv. 10–15).
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:1 Now. As earlier (4:9, 11), this word signals distress
for Zion. Wordplay between muster your troops and daughter of troops
suggests Zion is unable to establish an army to defend itself. siege.
Probably that of Sennacherib (701 B.C.). strike the judge of Israel. A
metaphor of humiliation for Israel’s king, who is now under siege (2 Chron.
32:10).
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:2 But you. Both here and in 4:8, these words signal
renewed kingship. Bethlehem, where David was born (1 Sam. 17:12), is
located in Ephrathah. too little. The unlikely choice of David as king
foreshadows the unlikely choice of Bethlehem as the hometown of the
greater David, the Messiah. Matthew 2:6 shows that Jewish scholars of
Jesus’ day read this as a prediction of the Messiah’s birthplace (see John
7:42). The Messiah’s coming forth (or “origins”) is from of old, from
ancient days. The Messiah’s lineage confirms that the ancient covenantal
promises made to David still stand (see 2 Sam. 7:16).
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:3 he shall give them up. Israel will be ruled by others.
his brothers shall return. The Messiah will unite Israel.
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:4 he shall stand and shepherd. The Messiah’s rule and
protection of Yahweh’s flock are accomplished by Yahweh’s authority and
power. dwell secure . . . ends of the earth. God’s greatness ensures that
those who return (v. 3) will live without fear.
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:5–6 True peace among people is achieved by the
Messiah, who overcomes conflict (compare Eph. 2:14). The Assyrian
represents the enemies of God’s people. seven shepherds . . . eight
princes. This traditional formula (compare Eccles. 11:2) expresses a
parallel between the Messiah’s actions and those who faithfully lead in his
place. This is seen in the main verbs they shall shepherd . . . he shall
deliver.
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:7–8 delay not . . . nor wait. Like dew and rain, the
remnant of Israel will help other people. God will make this happen. goes
through, treads . . . tears . . . none to deliver. The remnant will also defeat
its enemies.
FACT
The land of Nimrod (5:6) included Assyria and other parts of
Mesopotamia. Nimrod was the son of Cush and was a “mighty hunter
before the LORD” (Gen. 10:8–14). Many cities of the region claim him as
their founder.
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:10–11 in that day. See 4:1, 6. The Lord will answer the
prayer implied in the wording of 5:9: he will cut off things that compromise
the holiness of his people. horses . . . strongholds. Armies and fortresses,
rather than the Lord, were often relied on as security against external
enemies (compare Isa. 31:1; Hos. 8:14).
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:12–13 sorceries . . . tellers of fortunes. Seeking occult
knowledge was forbidden to Israel (Deut. 18:10, 14). your carved images .
. . your pillars. See Mic. 1:7; Rom. 1:22–23.
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:14 Asherah images are wooden images of the
Canaanite fertility goddess.
MICAH—NOTE ON 5:15 execute vengeance. The Lord alone, as the
sovereign ruler, has the right to rescue his people and punish the nations
that did not obey. The nations that return to the Lord receive instruction
(4:1–2), while those that will not submit to his rule receive destruction
(5:15).
6:1–7:20 The Lord’ s Indictment and Restoration of His People. The Lord’s
indictment against his people is delivered (6:1–8), and the crisis within the
covenantal relationship is described (6:9–7:7). Micah expresses trust that
the Lord will defend his people (7:8–13). The Lord will shepherd his flock
with compassion (7:14–20).
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:1–2 Hear (see also 1:2; 3:1). In this “covenant lawsuit,”
Micah summons the participants to the trial: Israel, the Lord himself, and
the entire created order. case . . . indictment. Words that suggest a legal
proceeding (compare 7:9; Isa. 41:21; 50:8). Micah invites the Lord to
present his case against the people. The jury consists of the mountains and
the foundations of the earth.
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:3 my people. The Lord presents his case. He reminds
Israel of its covenantal relationship with him. Answer me! challenges the
Israelites to prove their charge that the Lord has wronged them.
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:4 I brought you up . . . redeemed you . . . sent before
you. The Lord directed the events surrounding the exodus (compare Amos
3:1–2).
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:5 The mention of Balak and Balaam (Numbers 22–24)
reminds Israel that the Lord wants to bless rather than curse them.
remember . . . that you may know. Faith is strengthened in the present by
remembering God’s covenant-keeping deliverances in the past. The people
of Israel crossed the Jordan from Shittim to Gilgal on the final portion of
their journey (Joshua 2–4). At Shittim the covenant was broken (Num.
25:1–9), and at Gilgal it was renewed (Joshua 5).
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:6–7 LORD . . . God on high. The covenantal Lord is
also the transcendent God. Shall I give . . . ? The proposed sacrifices
increase in value and absurdity, ending with an outrage (ten thousands of
rivers of oil . . . my firstborn). Micah is exposing an attitude that wrongly
sees sacrifice as an entry fee, rather than as an avenue for God to administer
grace and forgiveness to the repentant (see note on Amos 4:4–5).
FACT
God has always been the same. The last verses of Micah describe God
the Father as forgiving, compassionate, faithful, and loving (7:18–20).
Jesus Christ, who is God the Son, is the living embodiment of these
characteristics.
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:8 The Lord wants his people to respond to his
redemptive acts with justice, kindness, and faithfulness (walk humbly)
(see Matt. 23:23; compare Deut. 10:12–13; Isa. 1:11–17). On the meaning
of “justice,” see notes on Isa. 42:1; Jer. 22:3; Amos 5:7. your God. The
complement to “my people” (Mic. 6:3, 5).
MICAH
Rather than being identified by his father or family, Micah is identified
by a location: he is called “Micah of Moresheth” (1:1). The town was 22
miles (35 km) southwest of Jerusalem. Micah’s call to prophetic ministry
is not recorded, and he is never referred to as “prophet,” but he is said to
be speaking according to the “Spirit of the LORD” (3:8). The name
“Micah” means “Who is like Yahweh?” Similarly, at the end of the book,
Micah asks, “Who is a God like you?” (7:18). Both Micah’s name and his
writings emphasize the matchless character and actions of the Lord.
Micah announces God’s judgment on Israel for its unfaithfulness, yet he
also proclaims God’s promise of great blessing through a Messiah—a
prophecy fulfilled in Jesus Christ (5:1–15; Eph. 1:3–14). (Micah 6:8)
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:9–7:7 The Lord’s “lawsuit” continues. The city and its
people are indicted for specific crimes (6:9–12); the divine sentence is
delivered (6:13–16); and the consequences are envisioned (7:1–6).
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:9 the city. Probably Jerusalem and its inhabitants.
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:10–11 treasures of wickedness . . . wicked scales. The
Lord cannot tolerate his people’s gaining wealth by unfair business
practices (compare Prov. 11:1; 20:10).
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:13 Therefore I strike you . . . , making you desolate.
This general statement of the Lord’s judgment connects the people’s
wickedness (vv. 10–12) with the specific sentence that follows (vv. 14–15).
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:14–15 You shall sow, but not reap. Human activity is
useless without God’s blessing. This is God’s sentence against his people
for their sin (compare Deut. 28:30–31; Amos 5:11; Zeph. 1:13).
MICAH—NOTE ON 6:16 Omri . . . Ahab. These wicked kings of Israel (the
northern kingdom) had been a corrupting influence even on the southern
kingdom of Judah (see 1 Kings 16:25–33). walked in their counsels.
Replacing the Lord, their true counselor, with the ways of these wicked
human kings led to desolation . . . hissing . . . scorn. Hope remains,
however, because God still claims them (my people).
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:1–2 summer fruit has been gathered . . . grapes have
been gleaned. . . . The godly has perished. In gleaning the fields of the
summer harvest, one expects to find leftovers. Micah’s search yields no
godly remnant, only sorrow and futility (compare 6:14–15; Isa. 17:6).
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:3 The “asking” of the prince and judge and “uttering”
of the great man highlight the constant demands of corrupt leaders.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:4–6 day of your watchmen. Just as the lookout on the
city wall warned of approaching danger, so Micah announced the
approaching judgment (compare Ezek. 3:16–21; 33:7–9; Hos. 9:8). your
punishment . . . their confusion. Both social and family relationships have
broken down in a city under attack.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:7 But as for me contrasts Micah with the unfaithful
leaders of vv. 3–4 (compare 3:8). I will look identifies Micah with the
watchmen of 7:4. I will wait . . . my God will hear me expresses the quiet
confidence that God will act.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:8 I fall . . . rise; . . . I sit in darkness . . . light. The city
is compared to a prisoner of war, near death and in a dungeon of gloom. Yet
the Lord provides the sure hope of freedom.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:9 indignation of the LORD . . . he pleads my cause.
The people admit that they have sinned. Yet they also know God forgives
those who repent. out to the light . . . his vindication. The rightness and
justice of the Lord’s action are “seen” in the freeing of the prisoner and the
shaming of the enemy.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:10 shame will cover. . . . My eyes will look upon her.
A reversal of roles takes place. Those nations that earlier desired to see Zion
defiled (4:11) are now publicly scorned.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:11–12 Three activities of the future day bind these
verses together. (1) building . . . walls. The enemy “now trampled” (v. 10)
contrasts with the rising security (compare v. 8) of Zion’s walls. (2)
boundary . . . extended. Beyond security, there is a promise of territorial
expansion (Ex. 23:31; Isa. 26:15). (3) They will come refers to the gathered
remnant (Isa. 11:11–12; Zech. 10:9–10) and the nations (Mic. 4:1–2; Zech.
14:16). Assyria . . . Egypt . . . sea . . . mountain. Salvation will go out to
all the Gentiles.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:13 desolate. Safety is found only in Jerusalem. Outside
there is only a wasteland.
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:14 Shepherd your people . . . your inheritance is a
request that the Lord would feed and protect the nation (compare Deut.
32:9; Ps. 28:9; 78:70–71). Bashan and Gilead. These fertile areas east of
the Jordan were among the first lands that Israel gained when entering the
Promised Land (Josh. 13:19–31). Centuries later, they were the first lands
lost (2 Kings 10:32–33).
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:15 when you came out. The people of God in all ages
are included in the deliverance from Egypt (compare Deut. 5:3). The Lord
has acted in the past, and he will do so again. marvelous things. This term
is associated with the Lord’s acts in the presence of Pharaoh (Ex. 3:20).
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:16–17 see and be ashamed. This describes what the
nations experience when they observe God’s power (compare v. 10). the
LORD our God. The shepherd of v. 14 is now identified. fear. The similar
sound and spelling of “graze” (v. 14), “see” (v. 16), and “fear” (v. 17)
clarify the interaction of the Lord with Israel and the other nations. God’s
people are fed, and the nations fear (compare Ex. 15:14–16).
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:18 Who is a God like you? The question emphasizes
the uniqueness of the God who defends and pardons his people (compare
Ex. 15:11; Deut. 3:24; Ps. 35:10; 89:5–8). because he delights in steadfast
love. This is why God forgives. The confrontation resulting from Israel’s sin
(Mic. 1:5; 3:8) yields to the feeding (7:14) and forgiving of God’s
inheritance (Jer. 50:17–20).
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:19 cast . . . into the depths. As God cast Pharaoh’s
armies into the sea (Ex. 15:4), so he will deal decisively with the sins of his
people (compare Jer. 31:34).
MICAH—NOTE ON 7:20 faithfulness . . . steadfast love . . . you have sworn.
The book concludes by summarizing the Lord’s key attributes and actions
(Ex. 34:6–7; Deut. 4:31; 7:12). the days of old. God’s character (his
steadfast love) moves him to keep his word (his faithfulness). Thus the old
promises to our fathers (Abraham and Jacob) still stand (see Gen. 12:1–9).
N a h u m
(return to table of contents)
Nahum 1 • Nahum 2 • Nahum 3
Introduction to Nahum
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Near East at the Time of Nahum
Global Message of Nahum
Nahum in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Nahum
The Global Message of Nahum for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Nahum
Introduction to Nahum
Timeline
Author and Date
The prophet Nahum was God’s messenger to announce the fall of Nineveh and
the complete overthrow of Assyria. Nahum refers to the fall of Thebes as a
well-known occurrence (3:8–10). The Assyrian king Ashurbanipal conquered
Thebes around 664 B.C. Nahum also predicts the fall of Nineveh, the capital of
Assyria, as a future event. Nineveh fell in 612 B.C. The book was composed,
therefore, between 664 and 612 B.C.
Theme
Nineveh, the arrogant capital of the Assyrian Empire, will be destroyed.
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Nahum’s book is a sequel to, and a dramatic contrast with, the book of Jonah.
Jonah’s mission to Nineveh was probably sometime in the first half of the
eighth century B.C. (700s). To Jonah’s dismay, the Ninevites listened to his
message, repented, and were spared God’s judgment.
This repentance, however, did not last beyond 745 B.C., when Nineveh
became the leading military power in the Near East. In 722 B.C. the Assyrians
conquered the northern kingdom of Israel. Nineveh was destroyed in 612 B.C.,
marking the end of the Assyrian empire.
Key Themes
1. The Lord is slow to anger and long-suffering, jealous for his own honor
and for his people, but he is wrathful and avenging against his enemies.
He controls nature, nations, and history. He is just, righteous, good,
merciful, gracious, loving, and faithful. He delivers and protects those
who trust in him.
2. God had used Assyria to punish unfaithful Israel and Judah. He also
brought well-deserved judgment on Assyria, according to his timetable
and method.
3. Nineveh fell because it was a godless and idolatrous city, a city of
violence, lust, and greed.
4. The Lord of history is a “stronghold” for “those who take refuge in him”
(1:7). He can handle all problems in individual lives. He has defeated
powers far greater than Assyria. He grants to his own the ultimate defense
and deliverance.
Outline
I. Introduction (1:1)
II. A Psalm Descriptively Praising the Lord (1:2–8)
III. The Lord’s Coming Judgment on Nineveh and Deliverance of Judah (1:9–
15)
IV . Focus on Nineveh: The Lord’s Coming Judgment (2:1–13)
V . Again, Focus on Nineveh: More concerning the Lord’s Coming Judgment
(3:1–19)
The Near East at the Time of Nahum
c. 660–614 B.C.
Nahum likely prophesied sometime between the high point of Assyria’s
power around 664 B.C. and the fall of Nineveh in 612. During this time the
Assyrian Empire was in decline. Meanwhile Egypt, Judah, and Babylonia
regained autonomy and eroded the power of Assyria. Nahum foretold of the
fall of Nineveh, the capital of the mighty Assyrian Empire.
The Global Message of Nahum
Not long after the Assyrian city of Nineveh repented because of Jonah’s
preaching, the same city was denounced by Nahum for its godlessness—
godlessness which earned God’s righteous wrath. “The LORD is a jealous
and avenging God; the LORD is avenging and wrathful; the LORD takes
vengeance on his adversaries and keeps wrath for his enemies” (Nah. 1:2).
Thus opens Nahum’s prophecy, and this is the message of this book of the
Bible for the world today. The God of heaven is a God of mercy to the
penitent, yet a God of doom to the impenitent. Avoiding the fierce
punishment of the Lord is not dependent on ethnicity, class, intelligence,
skin color, or family history, but on repentance and faith.
Nahum in Redemptive History
Judgment on Israel. God called a nation out from the rest of the world to be
a blessing to the rest of the world. Yet even this chosen nation, called to be a
kingdom of priests mediating God’s grace globally (Ex. 19:6), needed grace
themselves. They were themselves corrupt. As a result, God sent various
godless nations to punish his people. Seven hundred years before Christ he
sent the Assyrians.
Hope for Israel. Yet while God had used the Assyrians to punish his own
people, this did not mean his covenant with Israel would be undone. God’s
gracious intention to bring them a Messiah from the line of David, a true
and final king, would not be thwarted. The religious feasts of Judah, which
God encouraged them to keep, should have reminded them of this coming
king: “Behold, upon the mountains, the feet of him who brings good news,
who publishes peace! Keep your feasts, O Judah” (Nah. 1:15).
Judgment for Israel’ s enemies. Not only is redemption promised for
God’s own people; judgment is assured for those who will not bow the knee
and take refuge in the Lord. All those who cling to their own self-made
places of refuge will experience the terrifying flood of divine wrath that is
coming at the end of time. No one is exempt from God’s righteous
judgment that will overtake those who remain hostile to him.
Hope for all. For all those who take refuge in God and in the Savior he
sent, however, all the fiery and terrible punishment that they justly deserve
has been placed on another. Jesus Christ took God’s wrath upon himself for
the sake of all who would believe in him. Those who are in Christ, the
apostle Paul tells us, were crucified with Christ, so that the punishment they
deserve is now a past event to be wondered at, not a future event to be
feared (Rom. 6:1–11; Gal. 2:20). This is good news; this is published peace
(see Nah. 1:15).
Universal Themes in Nahum
Nahum’s prophecy resounds with one key theme above all others: the
horrifying experience of being judged by God when he is one’s enemy.
Listen to the way Nahum describes the punitive action of the Lord:
The mountains quake before him;
the hills melt;
the earth heaves before him,
the world and all who dwell in it. . . .
His wrath is poured out like fire,
and the rocks are broken into pieces by him. (Nah. 1:5–6)
The prophet is searching for language that will communicate the awful
terror awaiting those who reject God and abuse God’s people. For those
who “take refuge in him,” God “is good, a stronghold in the day of trouble”
(1:7). But for those who stand against the Lord and his people, “with an
overflowing flood he will make a complete end of the adversaries, and will
pursue his enemies into darkness” (1:8).
God is not a kindly, affable grandfather-like figure to those who mock
and oppose him. No corner of the earth will escape his hand of judgment
—“all who dwell in it” will come under judgment if they have not taken
humble refuge in him (Nah. 1:5).
The Global Message of Nahum for Today
It seems strange at first glance that the prophecy of Nahum, whose name
means “comfort,” would include so much denunciation and judgment. Yet
as such denunciation is directed against Israel’s oppressors, it is indeed a
deep comfort. In Nahum we see that no matter what present circumstances
may indicate, the Lord will bring every evil deed under his righteous
judgment.
This is profound encouragement for believers today around the globe.
Much of the pain involved in being a Christian can never be addressed in a
human court of law—gossip, slander, ridicule, scoffing, avoidance. Even if
persecution of believers involves actions that are clearly illegal, we cannot
always expect justice from the legal system; such systems are operated by
those who are themselves fallen and often unjust.
But there remains a divine court of law. And “the LORD will by no means
clear the guilty” (Nah. 1:3). No wickedness committed against God’s
people, however great or small, escapes the eye of God. His execution of
justice will be decisive, overwhelming, and unavoidable. “Who can stand
before his indignation? Who can endure the heat of his anger?” (1:6).
Believers worldwide can take heart at Nahum’s prophecy. The Lord is
with them. He will bring justice in his own time.