NEHEMIAH 3 [†]Then b Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brothers the
priests, and they built c the Sheep Gate. They consecrated it and d set its
doors. They consecrated it as far as the Tower of the Hundred, as far as the
e Tower of Hananel. 2And next to him f the men of Jericho built. And next
to them [1] Zaccur the son of Imri built.
3The sons of Hassenaah built g the Fish Gate. h They laid its beams and
d set its doors, its bolts, and its bars. 4And next to them i Meremoth the son
of Uriah, son of Hakkoz repaired. And next to them j Meshullam the son of
Berechiah, son of Meshezabel repaired. And next to them Zadok the son of
Baana repaired. 5[†]And next to them k the Tekoites repaired, but their
nobles would not stoop to serve their Lord. [2]
6Joiada the son of Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah l repaired
the Gate of Yeshanah. [3] h They laid its beams and d set its doors, its bolts,
and its bars. 7[†]And next to them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite and
Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah, the seat of m the
governor of the province Beyond the River.
8[†]Next to them Uzziel the son
of Harhaiah, goldsmiths, repaired. Next to him Hananiah, one of the
perfumers, repaired, and they restored Jerusalem as far as n the Broad Wall.
9[†]Next to them Rephaiah the son of Hur, o ruler of half the district of [4]
Jerusalem, repaired. 10Next to them Jedaiah the son of Harumaph repaired
opposite his house. And next to him Hattush the son of Hashabneiah
repaired. 11Malchijah the son of Harim and Hasshub the son of Pahath-
moab repaired another section and p the Tower of the Ovens. 12Next to him
Shallum the son of Hallohesh, q ruler of half the district of Jerusalem,
repaired, he and his daughters.
13[†]Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired r the Valley Gate.
They rebuilt it and s set its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and repaired a
thousand cubits [5] of the wall, as far as t the Dung Gate.
14Malchijah the son of Rechab, ruler of the district of u Beth-haccherem,
repaired t the Dung Gate. He rebuilt it and s set its doors, its bolts, and its
bars.
15And Shallum the son of Col-hozeh, ruler of the district of Mizpah,
repaired v the Fountain Gate. He rebuilt it and covered it and s set its doors,
its bolts, and its bars. And he built the wall of w the Pool of Shelah of x the
king’s garden, as far as y the stairs that go down from the city of David.
16[†]After him Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, ruler of half the district of
Beth-zur, repaired to a point opposite z the tombs of David, as far as a the
artificial pool, and as far as the house of the mighty men. 17After him the
Levites repaired: Rehum the son of Bani. Next to him Hashabiah, ruler of
half the district of Keilah, repaired for his district. 18After him their brothers
repaired: Bavvai the son of Henadad, ruler of half the district of Keilah.
19Next to him Ezer the son of Jeshua, ruler of Mizpah, repaired another
section opposite the ascent to the armory at b the buttress. [6] 20After him
Baruch the son of Zabbai repaired another section from the buttress to the
door of the house of c Eliashib the high priest. 21After him d Meremoth the
son of Uriah, son of Hakkoz repaired another section from the door of the
house of Eliashib to the end of the house of Eliashib. 22After him the
priests, the men of e the surrounding area, repaired. 23After them Benjamin
and Hasshub repaired opposite their house. After them Azariah the son of
Maaseiah, son of Ananiah repaired beside his own house. 24After him
Binnui the son of Henadad repaired another section, from the house of
Azariah to the buttress 25and to f the corner. Palal the son of Uzai repaired
opposite the buttress and the tower projecting from the upper house of the
king at g the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh
26[†] h and the temple servants living on i Ophel repaired to a point opposite
j the Water Gate on the east and the projecting tower.
27After him k the
Tekoites repaired another section opposite the great projecting tower as far
as the wall of Ophel.
28Above l the Horse Gate the priests repaired, each one opposite his own
house. 29[†]After them Zadok the son of Immer repaired opposite his own
house. After him Shemaiah the son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the East
Gate, repaired. 30After him Hananiah the son of Shelemiah and Hanun the
sixth son of Zalaph repaired another section. After him m Meshullam the
son of Berechiah repaired opposite n his chamber.
31After him Malchijah,
one of the goldsmiths, repaired as far as the house of the temple servants
and of the merchants, opposite the Muster Gate, [7] and to the upper
chamber of the corner.
32[†]And between the upper chamber of the corner
and o the Sheep Gate the goldsmiths and the merchants repaired.
Opposition to the Work