NEHEMIAH 12 [†]These are b the priests and the Levites who came up with
c Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and d Jeshua: e Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
2Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, 3Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 4Iddo,
Ginnethoi, Abijah, 5Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 6Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah,
7Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chiefs of the priests and of
their brothers in the days of Jeshua.
8And the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and
Mattaniah, who with his brothers was f in charge of the songs of
thanksgiving. 9And Bakbukiah and Unni and their brothers stood opposite
them g in the service. 10And Jeshua was the father of Joiakim, Joiakim the
father of Eliashib, Eliashib the father of Joiada, 11Joiada the father of
Jonathan, and Jonathan the father of Jaddua.
12[†] h And in the days of Joiakim were priests, heads of fathers’ houses:
of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah; 13of Ezra, Meshullam; of
Amariah, Jehohanan; 14of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph; 15of
Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai; 16of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon,
Meshullam; 17of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai; 18of
Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan; 19of Joiarib, Mattenai; of
Jedaiah, Uzzi; 20of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber; 21of Hilkiah, Hashabiah;
of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
22[†]In the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, the Levites
were recorded as heads of fathers’ houses; so too were the priests in the
reign of Darius the Persian. 23[†]As for the sons of Levi, their heads of
fathers’ houses i were written in the Book of the Chronicles until the days of
Johanan the son of Eliashib. 24[†]And the chiefs of the Levites: Hashabiah,
Sherebiah, and j Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brothers who stood
opposite them, k to praise and to give thanks, l according to the
commandment of David m the man of God, n watch by watch. 25Mattaniah,
Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub were gatekeepers
standing guard at o the storehouses of the gates. 26These were in the days of
Joiakim the son of Jeshua son of Jozadak, and in the days of p Nehemiah
the governor and of p Ezra, the priest and scribe.
Dedication of the Wall
27[†]And at q the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the
Levites in all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem to celebrate the
dedication with gladness, with thanksgivings and with singing, r with
cymbals, harps, and lyres. 28[†]And the sons of the singers gathered
together from the district surrounding Jerusalem and from the villages of
the Netophathites; 29also from Beth-gilgal and from the region of Geba and
Azmaveth, for the singers had built for themselves villages around
Jerusalem. 30[†]And the priests and the Levites s purified themselves, and
they purified the people and the gates and the wall.
31[†]Then I brought the leaders of Judah up onto the wall and appointed
two great choirs that gave thanks. t One went to the south on the wall to
u the Dung Gate. 32And after them went Hoshaiah and half of the leaders of
Judah, 33and Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam, 34Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, and
Jeremiah, 35and certain of the priests’ sons v with trumpets: Zechariah the
son of Jonathan, son of Shemaiah, son of Mattaniah, son of Micaiah, son of
Zaccur, son of Asaph; 36and his relatives, Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai,
Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani, w with the musical instruments
of David x the man of God. And Ezra the scribe went before them. 37At
y the Fountain Gate they went up straight before them by z the stairs of the
city of David, at the ascent of the wall, above the house of David, to a the
Water Gate on the east.
38
b The other choir of those who gave thanks went to the north, and I
followed them with half of the people, on the wall, above c the Tower of the
Ovens, to d the Broad Wall, 39and above e the Gate of Ephraim, and by f the
Gate of Yeshanah, [1] and by g the Fish Gate and h the Tower of Hananel and
h the Tower of the Hundred, to i the Sheep Gate; and they came to a halt at
j the Gate of the Guard. 40So both choirs of those who gave thanks stood in
the house of God, and I and half of the officials with me; 41and the priests
Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah,
k with trumpets; 42and Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan,
Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang with Jezrahiah as their
leader.
43And they offered great sacrifices that day and rejoiced, for God
had made them rejoice with great joy; the women and children also
rejoiced. And the joy of Jerusalem was heard far away.
Service at the Temple
44[†] l On that day men were appointed over the storerooms, the
contributions, the firstfruits, and the tithes, to gather into them the portions
required by the Law for the priests and for the Levites according to the
fields of the towns, for Judah rejoiced over the priests and the Levites who
ministered. 45And they performed the service of their God and the service
of purification, as did the singers and the gatekeepers, m according to the
command of David and his son Solomon. 46For long ago in the days of
David and n Asaph there were directors of the singers, and there were
songs [2] of praise and thanksgiving to God. 47And all Israel in the days of
Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah gave the o daily portions for the
singers and the gatekeepers; p and they set apart that which was for the
Levites; q and the Levites set apart that which was for the sons of Aaron.
Nehemiah’s Final Reforms