NEHEMIAH 10 [†] [1] e “On the seals are the names of [2] Nehemiah f the
governor, g the son of Hacaliah, Zedekiah, 2
h Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
3Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah, 4 i Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 5Harim,
Meremoth, Obadiah, 6Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 7Meshullam, Abijah,
Mijamin, 8Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah; these are the priests. 9And the
Levites: j Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of k Henadad,
Kadmiel; 10and their brothers, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
11Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah, 12Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 13Hodiah,
Bani, Beninu. 14The chiefs of the people: l Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam,
Zattu, Bani, 15Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 16Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 17Ater,
Hezekiah, Azzur,
18Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai, 19Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
20Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
21Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua, 22Pelatiah,
Hanan, Anaiah, 23Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub, 24Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
25Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, 26Ahiah, Hanan, Anan, 27Malluch, Harim,
Baanah.
The Obligations of the Covenant
28
m “The rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the
singers, the temple servants, n and all who have separated themselves from
the peoples of the lands to the Law of God, their wives, their sons, their
daughters, all who have knowledge and understanding, 29[†]join with their
brothers, their nobles, o and enter into a curse and an oath p to walk in
God’s Law that was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and
do all the commandments of the LORD our Lord and his rules and his
statutes. 30[†] q We will not give our daughters to the peoples of the land or
take their daughters for our sons. 31[†] r And if the peoples of the land bring
in goods or any grain on the Sabbath day to sell, we will not buy from them
on the Sabbath or on a holy day. And we will forego the crops of the
s seventh year and the t exaction of every debt.
32[†]“We also take on ourselves the obligation to give yearly u a third
part of a shekel [3] for the service of the house of our God: 33[†] v for the
showbread, w the regular grain offering, w the regular burnt offering, the
Sabbaths, the new moons, the appointed feasts, the holy things, and the sin
offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of
our God. 34 x We, the priests, the Levites, and the people, have likewise cast
lots y for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God, according
to our fathers’ houses, at times appointed, year by year, to burn on the altar
of the LORD our God, z as it is written in the Law.
35[†]We obligate
ourselves a to bring the firstfruits of our ground and the firstfruits of all fruit
of every tree, year by year, to the house of the LORD; 36[†]also to bring to
the house of our God, to the priests who minister in the house of our God,
the firstborn of our sons and of our cattle, b as it is written in the Law, and
the firstborn of our herds and of our flocks; 37[†] c and to bring the first of
our dough, and our contributions, the fruit of every tree, the wine and the
oil, to the priests, d to the chambers of the house of our God; and to bring to
the Levites the tithes from our ground, for it is the Levites who collect the
tithes in all our towns where we labor.
38[†]And the priest, the son of Aaron,
shall be with the Levites when the Levites receive the tithes. And the
Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the
chambers of e the storehouse. 39For the people of Israel and the sons of Levi
f shall bring the contribution of grain, wine, and oil to the chambers, where
the vessels of the sanctuary are, as well as the priests who minister, and the
gatekeepers and the singers. g We will not neglect the house of our God.”
The Leaders in Jerusalem