NUMBERS 33 [†]These are the stages of the people of Israel, when they went
out of the land of Egypt by their companies under the leadership of Moses
and Aaron. 2Moses wrote down their starting places, l stage by stage, by
command of the LORD, and these are their stages according to their starting
places. 3They m set out from Rameses in n the first month, on the fifteenth
day of the first month. On the day after the Passover, the people of Israel
went out o triumphantly in the sight of all the Egyptians, 4while the
Egyptians were burying all their firstborn, p whom the LORD had struck
down among them. q On their gods also the LORD executed judgments.
5[†]So the people of Israel set out from Rameses and camped at
r Succoth. 6And they set out from Succoth and camped at s Etham, which is
on the edge of the wilderness. 7And they set out from Etham and turned
back to t Pi-hahiroth, which is east of Baal-zephon, and they camped before
Migdol. 8And they set out from before Hahiroth [1] and u passed through the
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and they v went a three days’ journey in
the wilderness of Etham and camped at Marah. 9And they set out from
Marah and came to w Elim; at Elim there were twelve springs of water and
seventy palm trees, and they camped there. 10And they set out from Elim
and camped by the Red Sea. 11And they set out from the Red Sea and
camped in x the wilderness of Sin. 12And they set out from the wilderness
of Sin and camped at Dophkah. 13And they set out from Dophkah and
camped at Alush. 14And they set out from Alush and camped at y Rephidim,
where there was no water for the people to drink. 15And they set out from
Rephidim and camped in the z wilderness of Sinai. 16[†]And they set out
from the wilderness of Sinai and camped at a Kibroth-hattaavah. 17And they
set out from Kibroth-hattaavah and camped at b Hazeroth. 18[†]And they
c set out from Hazeroth and camped at Rithmah. 19And they set out from
Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez. 20And they set out from Rimmon-
perez and camped at Libnah. 21And they set out from Libnah and camped at
Rissah. 22And they set out from Rissah and camped at Kehelathah. 23And
they set out from Kehelathah and camped at Mount Shepher.
24And they set
out from Mount Shepher and camped at Haradah. 25And they set out from
Haradah and camped at Makheloth. 26And they set out from Makheloth and
camped at Tahath. 27And they set out from Tahath and camped at Terah.
28And they set out from Terah and camped at Mithkah. 29And they set out
from Mithkah and camped at Hashmonah. 30[†]And they set out from
Hashmonah and camped at Moseroth. 31And they set out from Moseroth
and camped at d Bene-jaakan. 32And they set out from Bene-jaakan and
camped at e Hor-haggidgad. 33And they set out from Hor-haggidgad and
camped at e Jotbathah. 34And they set out from Jotbathah and camped at
Abronah. 35[†]And they set out from Abronah and camped at f Ezion-geber.
36And they set out from Ezion-geber and camped in the g wilderness of Zin
(that is, Kadesh). 37[†]And they set out from h Kadesh and camped at
i Mount Hor, on the edge of the land of Edom.
38And Aaron the priest went up j Mount Hor at the command of the LORD
and died there, in the fortieth year after the people of Israel had come out of
the land of Egypt, on the first day of the fifth month. 39And Aaron was
k 123 years old when he died on Mount Hor.
40And l the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who lived in the Negeb in the
land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the people of Israel.
41And they set out from Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah. 42And they
set out from Zalmonah and camped at Punon. 43And they set out from
Punon and camped at m Oboth. 44And they set out from Oboth and camped
at n Iye-abarim, in the territory of Moab. 45And they set out from Iyim and
camped at o Dibon-gad. 46And they set out from Dibon-gad and camped at
Almon-diblathaim. 47And they set out from Almon-diblathaim p and
camped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo. 48And they set out from
the mountains of Abarim and camped in q the plains of Moab by the Jordan
at Jericho; 49they camped by the Jordan from Beth-jeshimoth as far as
r Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.
Drive Out the Inhabitants
50[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at
Jericho, saying, 51“Speak to the people of Israel and say to them, s When
you pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan, 52then t you shall drive
out u all the inhabitants of the land from before you and destroy all their
v figured stones and destroy all their metal images and demolish all their
high places. 53And you shall take possession of the land and settle in it, for I
have given the land to you to possess it. 54 w You shall inherit the land by lot
according to your clans. x To a large tribe you shall give a large inheritance,
and to a small tribe you shall give a small inheritance. Wherever the lot falls
for anyone, that shall be his. According to the tribes of your fathers you
shall inherit. 55But if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land from
before you, then those of them whom you let remain shall be as y barbs in
your eyes and thorns in your sides, and they shall trouble you in the land
where you dwell. 56And I will do to you z as I thought to do to them.”
Boundaries of the Land