NUMBERS 16 [†]Now i Korah the son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi,
and j Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and On the son of Peleth, sons
of Reuben, took men. 2And they rose up before Moses, with a number of
the people of Israel, 250 chiefs of the congregation, chosen from the
assembly, well-known men. 3[†] k They assembled themselves together
against Moses and against Aaron and said to them, l “You have gone too
far! For m all in the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the LORD
is among them. Why then do you exalt yourselves above the assembly of
the LORD?” 4When Moses heard it, n he fell on his face, 5and he said to
Korah and all his company, “In the morning the LORD will show o who is
his, [1] and who is p holy, and will bring him near to him. The one q whom
he chooses he will r bring near to him. 6Do this: take s censers, Korah and
all his company; 7put fire in them and put incense on them before the LORD
tomorrow, and the man whom the LORD chooses shall be the holy one. t You
have gone too far, sons of Levi!” 8[†]And Moses said to Korah, “Hear now,
you sons of Levi: 9is it u too small a thing for you that the God of Israel has
v separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to
himself, to do service in the tabernacle of the LORD and to stand before the
congregation to minister to them, 10and that he has brought you near him,
and all your brothers the sons of Levi with you? And would you seek the
priesthood also? 11Therefore it is against the LORD that you and all your
company have gathered together. What is w Aaron that you grumble against
him?”
12[†]And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and
they said, “We will not come up. 13Is it x a small thing that you have
brought us up out of y a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the
wilderness, that you must also z make yourself a prince over us?
14Moreover, you have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and
honey, nor given us inheritance of fields and vineyards. Will you put out the
eyes of these men? We will not come up.” 15[†]And Moses was very angry
and said to the LORD, a “Do not respect their offering. b I have not taken one
donkey from them, and I have not harmed one of them.”
16[†]And Moses said to Korah, “Be present, you and all your company,
c before the LORD, you and they, and Aaron, tomorrow.
17And d let every
one of you take his censer and put incense on it, and every one of you bring
before the LORD his censer, e 250 censers; you also, and Aaron, each his
censer.” 18So every man took his censer and put fire in them and laid
incense on them and stood at the entrance of the tent of meeting with Moses
and Aaron. 19Then Korah assembled all the congregation against them at
the entrance of the tent of meeting. f And the glory of the LORD appeared to
all the congregation.
20[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 21 g “Separate
yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them h in a
moment.” 22And they i fell on their faces and said, “O God, j the God of the
spirits of all flesh, k shall one man sin, and will you be angry with all the
congregation?” 23And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 24“Say to the
congregation, Get away from the dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.”
25Then Moses rose and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of
Israel followed him. 26And he spoke to the congregation, saying, l “Depart,
please, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest
you be swept away with all their sins.” 27So they got away from the
dwelling of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. And Dathan and Abiram came out
and stood m at the door of their tents, together with their wives, their sons,
and their little ones. 28And Moses said, “Hereby you shall know that the
LORD has sent me to do all these works, and that it has not been n of my
own accord. 29If these men die as all men die, or if they are visited by the
fate of all mankind, o then the LORD has not sent me. 30But if the LORD
creates something new, and p the ground opens its mouth and swallows
them up with all that belongs to them, and they q go down alive into Sheol,
then you shall know that these men have despised the LORD.”
31 r And as soon as he had finished speaking all these words, the ground
under them split apart. 32And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed
them up, with their households and s all the people who belonged to Korah
and all their goods. 33So they and all that belonged to them went down alive
into Sheol, and the earth closed over them, and t they perished from the
midst of the assembly.
34And all Israel who were around them fled at their
cry, for they said, “Lest the earth swallow us up!” 35[†]And u fire came out
from the LORD and consumed v the 250 men offering the incense.
36 [2] Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 37“Tell Eleazar the son of
Aaron the priest to take up the censers out of the blaze. Then scatter the fire
far and wide, for they have become holy.
38As for the censers of w these
men who have sinned at the cost of their lives, let them be made into
hammered plates as a covering for the altar, for they offered them before the
LORD, and they became holy. x Thus they shall be a sign to the people of
Israel.” 39[†]So Eleazar the priest took the bronze censers, which those who
were burned had offered, and they were hammered out as a covering for the
altar,
40to be a reminder to the people of Israel, so y that no outsider, who is
not of the descendants of Aaron, should draw near to burn incense before
the LORD, lest he become like Korah and his company—as the LORD said to
him through Moses.
41[†]But on the next day all the congregation of the people of Israel
z grumbled against Moses and against Aaron, saying, “You have killed the
people of the LORD.” 42And when the congregation had assembled against
Moses and against Aaron, they turned toward the tent of meeting. And
behold, a the cloud covered it, and b the glory of the LORD appeared. 43And
Moses and Aaron came to the front of the tent of meeting, 44and the LORD
spoke to Moses, saying, 45 c “Get away from the midst of this congregation,
that I may consume them in a moment.” d And they fell on their faces.
46And Moses said to Aaron, “Take your censer, and put fire on it from off
the altar and lay incense on it and carry it quickly to the congregation and
make atonement for them, for e wrath has gone out from the LORD; the
plague has begun.” 47So Aaron took it as Moses said and ran into the midst
of the assembly. And behold, the plague had already begun among the
people. And he put on the incense and made atonement for the people.
48And he stood between the dead and the living, and f the plague was
stopped. 49Now those who died in the plague were 14,700, g besides those
who died in the affair of Korah. 50And Aaron returned to Moses at the
entrance of the tent of meeting, when the plague was stopped.
Aaron’s Staff Buds