NUMBERS 20 [†]And the people of Israel, the whole congregation, came
k into the wilderness of Zin in the first month, and the people stayed in
Kadesh. And l Miriam died there and was buried there.
The Waters of Meribah
2[†] m Now there was no water for the congregation. n And they assembled
themselves together against Moses and against Aaron. 3And the people
o quarreled with Moses and said, “Would that we had perished p when our
brothers perished before the LORD! 4Why have you brought the assembly of
the LORD into this wilderness, that we should die here, both we and our
cattle? 5And q why have you made us come up out of Egypt to bring us to
this evil place? It is no place for grain or figs or vines or pomegranates, and
there is no water to drink.” 6Then Moses and Aaron went from the presence
of the assembly to the entrance of the tent of meeting and r fell on their
faces. s And the glory of the LORD appeared to them, 7and the LORD spoke
to Moses, saying, 8 t “Take the staff, and assemble the congregation, you and
Aaron your brother, and tell the rock before their eyes to yield its water. So
u you shall bring water out of the rock for them and give drink to the
congregation and their cattle.” 9And Moses took the staff v from before the
LORD, as he commanded him.
Moses Strikes the Rock
10Then Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly together before the rock,
and he said to them, w “Hear now, you rebels: shall we bring water for you
out of this rock?” 11And Moses lifted up his hand and struck the rock with
his staff twice, u and water came out abundantly, and the congregation
drank, and their livestock. 12And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
“Because x you did not believe in me, y to uphold me as holy in the eyes of
the people of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land
that I have given them.” 13 z These are the waters of Meribah, [1] where the
people of Israel quarreled with the LORD, and through them he showed
himself holy.
Edom Refuses Passage
14[†] a Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to b the king of Edom: “Thus
says c your brother Israel: You know all the hardship that we have met:
15
d how our fathers went down to Egypt, e and we lived in Egypt a long
time. f And the Egyptians dealt harshly with us and our fathers. 16[†]And
g when we cried to the LORD, he heard our voice and h sent an angel and
brought us out of Egypt. And here we are in Kadesh, a city on the edge of
your territory.
17[†] i Please let us pass through your land. We will not pass
through field or vineyard, j or drink water from a well. We will go along the
King’s Highway. We will not turn aside to the right hand or to the left until
we have passed through your territory.” 18But Edom said to him, “You shall
not pass through, lest I come out with the sword against you.” 19And the
people of Israel said to him, “We will go up by the highway, k and if we
drink of your water, I and my livestock, l then I will pay for it. Let me only
pass through on foot, nothing more.” 20But he said, m “You shall not pass
through.” And Edom came out against them with a large army and with a
strong force. 21Thus Edom n refused to give Israel passage through his
territory, so Israel o turned away from him.
The Death of Aaron
22[†]And they journeyed from p Kadesh, and the people of Israel, the whole
congregation, came to q Mount Hor.
23And the LORD said to Moses and
Aaron at Mount Hor, on the border of the land of Edom, 24 r “Let Aaron be
gathered to his people, for he shall not enter the land that I have given to the
people of Israel, because s you rebelled against my command at the waters
of Meribah. 25Take Aaron and Eleazar his son and bring them up to Mount
Hor.
26[†]And strip Aaron of his garments and put them on Eleazar his son.
And Aaron r shall be gathered to his people and shall die there.” 27Moses
did as the LORD commanded. And they went up Mount Hor in the sight of
all the congregation. 28[†] t And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments and
put them on Eleazar his son. And Aaron died there u on the top of the
mountain. Then Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain. 29And
when all the congregation saw that Aaron had perished, v all the house of
Israel wept for Aaron thirty days.
Arad Destroyed