NUMBERS 27 [†]Then drew near the daughters of x Zelophehad the son of
Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, from the clans of
Manasseh the son of Joseph. The names of his daughters were: Mahlah,
Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 2And they stood before Moses and
before Eleazar the priest and before the chiefs and all the congregation, at
the entrance of the tent of meeting, saying, 3[†]“Our father y died in the
wilderness. He was not among the company of those who gathered
themselves together against the LORD z in the company of Korah, but a died
for his own sin. And he had no sons. 4Why should the name of our father be
taken away from his clan because he had no son? b Give to us a possession
among our father’s brothers.”
5Moses c brought their case before the LORD.
6And the LORD said to
Moses, 7“The daughters of Zelophehad d are right. e You shall give them
possession of an inheritance among their father’s brothers and transfer the
inheritance of their father to them. 8And you shall speak to the people of
Israel, saying, ‘If a man dies and has no son, then you shall transfer his
inheritance to his daughter.
9And if he has no daughter, then you shall give
his inheritance to his brothers. 10And if he has no brothers, then you shall
give his inheritance to his father’s brothers. 11And if his father has no
brothers, then you shall give his inheritance to the nearest f kinsman of his
clan, and he shall possess it. And it shall be for the people of Israel g a
statute and rule, as the LORD commanded Moses.’”
Joshua to Succeed Moses
12[†]The LORD said to Moses, “Go up into h this mountain of Abarim and
see the land that I have given to the people of Israel. 13When you have seen
it, you also i shall be gathered to your people, as your brother Aaron was,
14 j because you rebelled against my word in the wilderness of Zin when the
congregation quarreled, failing k to uphold me as holy at the waters before
their eyes.” (These are l the waters of Meribah of Kadesh in the wilderness
of Zin.) 15Moses spoke to the LORD, saying, 16“Let the LORD, m the God of
the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation 17who n shall go
out before them and come in before them, who shall lead them out and
bring them in, that the congregation of the LORD may not be o as sheep that
have no shepherd.” 18So the LORD said to Moses, “Take p Joshua the son of
Nun, a man q in whom is the Spirit, and r lay your hand on him. 19Make
him stand before Eleazar the priest and all the congregation, and you shall
s commission him in their sight. 20[†]You shall invest him with some of
your authority, t that all the congregation of the people of Israel may obey.
21And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him
u by the judgment of the Urim before the LORD. At his word they shall go
out, and at his word they shall come in, both he and all the people of Israel
with him, the whole congregation.” 22And Moses did as the LORD
commanded him. He took Joshua and made him stand before Eleazar the
priest and the whole congregation, 23and he laid his hands on him and
s commissioned him as the LORD directed through Moses.
Daily Offerings