NUMBERS 29 [†]“On the first day of the seventh month you shall have a
holy convocation. You shall not do any ordinary work. q It is a day for you
to blow the trumpets, 2and you shall offer a burnt offering, for a pleasing
aroma to the LORD: one bull from the herd, one ram, seven male lambs a
year old without blemish; 3also their grain offering of fine flour mixed with
oil, three tenths of an ephah [1] for the bull, two tenths for the ram, 4and one
tenth for each of the seven lambs; 5with o one male goat for a sin offering,
to make atonement for you; 6besides r the burnt offering of the new moon,
and its grain offering, and s the regular burnt offering and its grain offering,
and their drink offering, according to the rule for them, for a pleasing
aroma, a food offering to the LORD.
Offerings for the Day of Atonement
7[†] t “On the tenth day of this seventh month you shall have a holy
convocation and u afflict yourselves. [2] You shall do no work, 8but you shall
offer a burnt offering to the LORD, a pleasing aroma: one bull from the herd,
one ram, seven male lambs a year old: v see that they are without blemish.
9And their grain offering shall be of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenths
of an ephah for the bull, two tenths for the one ram, 10a tenth for each of the
seven lambs: 11also w one male goat for a sin offering, besides x the sin
offering of atonement, and the regular burnt offering and its grain offering,
and their drink offerings.
Offerings for the Feast of Booths
12[†] y “On the fifteenth day of the seventh month you shall have a holy
convocation. You shall not do any ordinary work, and you shall keep a feast
to the LORD seven days. 13And z you shall offer a burnt offering, a food
offering, with a pleasing aroma to the LORD, thirteen bulls from the herd,
two rams, fourteen male lambs a year old; they shall be without blemish;
14and their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenths of an
ephah for each of the thirteen bulls, two tenths for each of the two rams,
15and a tenth for each of the fourteen lambs; 16also one male goat for a sin
offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and its drink
offering.
17“On the second day twelve bulls from the herd, two rams, fourteen
male lambs a year old without blemish, 18with the grain offering and the
drink offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, a in the
prescribed quantities; 19also one male goat for a sin offering, besides the
regular burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings.
20“On the third day eleven bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year
old without blemish, 21with the grain offering and the drink offerings for the
bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, in the prescribed quantities; 22also
one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering and its
grain offering and its drink offering.
23“On the fourth day ten bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year old
without blemish, 24with the grain offering and the drink offerings for the
bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, in the prescribed quantities; 25also
one male goat for a sin offering, besides the regular burnt offering, its grain
offering and its drink offering.
26“On the fifth day nine bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year old
without blemish, 27with the grain offering and the drink offerings for the
bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, in the prescribed quantities; 28also
one male goat for a sin offering; besides the regular burnt offering and its
grain offering and its drink offering.
29“On the sixth day eight bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year old
without blemish, 30with the grain offering and the drink offerings for the
bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, in the prescribed quantities; 31also
one male goat for a sin offering; besides the regular burnt offering, its grain
offering, and its drink offerings.
32“On the seventh day seven bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year
old without blemish, 33with the grain offering and the drink offerings for the
bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, in the prescribed quantities; 34also
one male goat for a sin offering; besides the regular burnt offering, its grain
offering, and its drink offering.
35 b “On the eighth day you shall have a c solemn assembly. You shall not
do any ordinary work, 36but you shall offer a burnt offering, a food offering,
with a pleasing aroma to the LORD: one bull, one ram, seven male lambs a
year old without blemish, 37and the grain offering and the drink offerings
for the bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, in the prescribed quantities;
38also one male goat for a sin offering; besides the regular burnt offering
and its grain offering and its drink offering.
39[†]“These you shall offer to the LORD at your d appointed feasts, in
addition to your e vow offerings and your freewill offerings, for your burnt
offerings, and for your grain offerings, and for your drink offerings, and for
your peace offerings.”
40 [3] So Moses told the people of Israel everything just as the LORD had
commanded Moses.
Men and Vows