NUMBERS 6 [†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the people
of Israel and say to them, When either a man or a woman makes a special
vow, the vow of e a Nazirite, [1] f to separate himself to the LORD,
3he g shall
separate himself from wine and strong drink. He shall drink no vinegar
made from wine or strong drink and shall not drink any juice of grapes or
eat grapes, fresh or dried. 4All the days of his separation [2] he shall eat
nothing that is produced by the grapevine, not even the seeds or the skins.
5“All the days of his vow of separation, no h razor shall touch his head.
Until the time is completed for which he separates himself to the LORD, he
shall be holy. i He shall let the locks of hair of his head grow long.
6“All the days that he separates himself to the LORD j he shall not go near
a dead body.
7[†] k Not even for his father or for his mother, for brother or
sister, if they die, shall he make himself unclean, because his separation to
God is on his head. 8All the days of his separation he is holy to the LORD.
9“And if any man dies very suddenly beside him and he defiles his
consecrated head, then l he shall shave his head on the day of his cleansing;
on the seventh day he shall shave it. 10
m On the eighth day he shall bring
two turtledoves or two pigeons to the priest to the entrance of the tent of
meeting, 11and the priest shall offer one for a sin offering and the other for a
burnt offering, and make atonement for him, because he sinned by reason of
the dead body. And he shall consecrate his head that same day 12and
separate himself to the LORD for the days of his separation and bring a male
lamb a year old n for a guilt offering. But the previous period shall be void,
because his separation was defiled.
13[†]“And this is the law for the Nazirite, o when the time of his
separation has been completed: he shall be brought to the entrance of the
tent of meeting, 14and he shall bring his gift to the LORD, one male lamb a
year old without blemish for a burnt offering, and one ewe lamb a year old
without blemish p as a sin offering, and one ram without blemish q as a
peace offering, 15and a basket of unleavened bread, r loaves of fine flour
mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers smeared with oil, and their s grain
offering and their t drink offerings. 16And the priest shall bring them before
the LORD and offer u his sin offering and his burnt offering, 17and he shall
offer the ram as a sacrifice of peace offering to the LORD, with the basket of
unleavened bread. The priest shall offer also its grain offering and its drink
offering. 18And the Nazirite v shall shave his consecrated head at the
entrance of the tent of meeting and shall take the hair from his consecrated
head and put it on the fire that is under the sacrifice of the peace offering.
19And the priest shall take the w shoulder of the ram, when it is boiled, and
one unleavened loaf out of the basket and one unleavened wafer, and x shall
put them on the hands of the Nazirite, after he has shaved the hair of his
consecration, 20and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before
the LORD. y They are a holy portion for the priest, together with the breast
that is waved and the thigh that is contributed. And after that the Nazirite
may drink wine.
21“This is the law of the Nazirite. But if he vows an offering to the LORD
above his Nazirite vow, as he can afford, in exact accordance with the vow
that he takes, then he shall do in addition to the law of the Nazirite.”
Aaron’s Blessing
22[†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 23“Speak to Aaron and his sons,
saying, Thus z you shall bless the people of Israel: you shall say to them,
24[†] The LORD a bless you and b keep you;
25 the LORD c make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you;
26[†] the LORD d lift up his countenance [3] upon you and give you
peace.
27 e “So shall they put my name upon the people of Israel, and I will bless
them.”
Offerings at the Tabernacle’s Consecration