NUMBERS 13 [†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2[†] g “Send men to spy
out the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the people of Israel. From
each tribe of their fathers you shall send a man, every one a chief among
them.” 3So Moses sent them from h the wilderness of Paran, according to
the command of the LORD, all of them men who were heads of the people of
Israel. 4[†]And these were their names: From the tribe of Reuben, Shammua
the son of Zaccur; 5from the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori;
6 i from the tribe of Judah, j Caleb the son of Jephunneh; 7from the tribe of
Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph; 8from the tribe of Ephraim, k Hoshea the
son of Nun; 9from the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu; 10from the
tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi; 11from the tribe of Joseph (that is,
from the tribe of Manasseh), Gaddi the son of Susi; 12from the tribe of Dan,
Ammiel the son of Gemalli; 13from the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of
Michael; 14from the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi; 15from the
tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi. 16These were the names of the men
whom Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called k Hoshea the son
of Nun Joshua.
17[†]Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan and said to them,
“Go up into l the Negeb and go up into m the hill country,
18and see what
the land is, and whether the people who dwell in it are strong or weak,
whether they are few or many,
19and whether the land that they dwell in is
good or bad, and whether the cities that they dwell in are camps or
strongholds, 20[†]and whether the land is n rich or poor, and whether there
are trees in it or not. o Be of good courage and bring some of the fruit of the
land.” Now the time was the season of the first ripe grapes.
21So they went up and spied out the land p from the wilderness of Zin to
Rehob, q near Lebo-hamath. 22[†]They went up into m the Negeb and came
to r Hebron. s Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the t descendants of Anak,
were there. ( u Hebron was built seven years before u Zoan in Egypt.)
23[†]And v they came to the Valley of Eshcol and cut down from there a
branch with a single cluster of grapes, and they carried it on a pole between
two of them; they also brought some pomegranates and figs. 24That place
was called the Valley of Eshcol, [1] because of the cluster that the people of
Israel cut down from there.
Report of the Spies
25[†]At the end of forty days they returned from spying out the land. 26And
they came to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation of the people of
Israel in the wilderness of Paran, at w Kadesh. They brought back word to
them and to all the congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land.
27And they told him, “We came to the land to which you sent us. It x flows
with milk and honey, y and this is its fruit. 28
z However, the people who
dwell in the land are strong, and the cities are fortified and very large. And
besides, we saw the descendants of Anak there. 29 a The Amalekites dwell in
the land of the Negeb. The Hittites, the Jebusites, and the Amorites dwell in
the hill country. b And the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and along the
Jordan.”
30But c Caleb quieted the people before Moses and said, “Let us go up at
once and occupy it, for we are well able to overcome it.” 31
d Then the men
who had gone up with him said, “We are not able to go up against the
people, for they are stronger than we are.” 32So e they brought to the people
of Israel a bad report of the land that they had spied out, saying, “The land,
through which we have gone to spy it out, is a land that devours its
inhabitants, and f all the people that we saw in it are of great height. 33And
there we saw the g Nephilim (the sons of Anak, who come from the
g Nephilim), and we seemed to ourselves h like grasshoppers, and so we
seemed to them.”
The People Rebel
NUMBERS 14 Then all the congregation raised a loud cry, and the people
i wept that night. 2And all the people of Israel j grumbled against Moses and
Aaron. The whole congregation said to them, “Would that we had died in
the land of Egypt! Or k would that we had died in this wilderness! 3Why is
the LORD bringing us into this land, to fall by the sword? l Our wives and
our little ones will become a prey. Would it not be better for us to go back to
Egypt?” 4And they said to one another, m “Let us choose a leader and n go
back to Egypt.”
5Then o Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of
the congregation of the people of Israel. 6[†] p And Joshua the son of Nun
and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, who were among those who had spied out
the land, tore their clothes 7and said to all the congregation of the people of
Israel, q “The land, which we passed through to spy it out, is an exceedingly
good land. 8[†]If r the LORD delights in us, he will bring us into this land
and give it to us, s a land that flows with milk and honey.
9Only t do not
rebel against the LORD. And u do not fear the people of the land, for v they
are bread for us. Their protection is removed from them, and the LORD is
with us; do not fear them.” 10 w Then all the congregation said to stone them
with stones. But x the glory of the LORD appeared at the tent of meeting to
all the people of Israel.
11[†]And the LORD said to Moses, “How long will this people y despise
me? And how long will they not z believe in me, in spite of all the signs that
I have done among them? 12I will strike them with the pestilence and
disinherit them, and I a will make of you a nation greater and mightier than
they.”
Moses Intercedes for the People
13[†]But b Moses said to the LORD, “Then the Egyptians will hear of it, for
you brought up this people in your might from among them, 14and they will
tell the inhabitants of this land. c They have heard that you, O LORD, are in
the midst of this people. For you, O LORD, are seen face to face, and d your
cloud stands over them and you go before them, in a pillar of cloud by day
and in a pillar of fire by night. 15Now if you kill this people as one man,
then the nations who have heard your fame will say,
16‘It is because the
LORD e was not able to bring this people into the land that he swore to give
to them that he has killed them in the wilderness.’ 17And now, please let the
power of the Lord be great as you have promised, saying, 18 f ‘The LORD is
slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, but he will by no means clear the guilty, g visiting the
iniquity of the fathers on the children, to the third and the fourth
generation.’ 19Please h pardon the iniquity of this people, according to the
greatness of your steadfast love, just i as you have forgiven this people,
from Egypt until now.”
God Promises Judgment
20[†]Then the LORD said, “I have pardoned, j according to your word.
21[†]But truly, as I live, and as all k the earth shall be filled with the glory of
the LORD,
22 l none of the men who have seen my glory and my signs that I
did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and yet have put me to the test these
m ten times and have not obeyed my voice, 23
n shall see the land that I
swore to give to their fathers. And none of those who despised me shall see
it. 24But my servant o Caleb, because he has a different spirit and has
p followed me fully, I will bring into the land into which he went, and his
descendants shall possess it. 25
q Now, since the Amalekites and the
Canaanites dwell in the valleys, r turn tomorrow and set out for the
wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.”
26And the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 27“How long shall
s this wicked congregation grumble against me? t I have heard the
grumblings of the people of Israel, which they grumble against me. 28Say to
them, u ‘As I live, declares the LORD, v what you have said in my hearing I
will do to you: 29[†] w your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness, and x of
all your number, listed in the census y from twenty years old and upward,
who have grumbled against me, 30not one shall come into the land where I
z swore that I would make you dwell, a except Caleb the son of Jephunneh
and Joshua the son of Nun. 31 b But your little ones, who you said would
become a prey, I will bring in, and they shall know the land that c you have
rejected. 32But as for you, w your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness.
33And your children d shall be shepherds in the wilderness e forty years and
shall f suffer for your faithlessness, until the last of your dead bodies lies in
the wilderness. 34 g According to the number of the days in which you spied
out the land, h forty days, a year for each day, you shall bear your iniquity
forty years, and you shall know my displeasure.’ 35
i I, the LORD, have
spoken. Surely this will I do to all j this wicked congregation who are
gathered together against me: in this wilderness they shall come to a full
end, and there they shall die.”
36[†] k And the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land, who returned
and made all the congregation grumble against him by bringing up a bad
report about the land— 37the men who brought up a bad report of the land
— l died by plague before the LORD.
38Of those men who went to spy out
the land, m only Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh
remained alive.
Israel Defeated in Battle
39When Moses told these words to all the people of Israel, the people
n mourned greatly.
40And they rose early in the morning and went up to the
heights of the hill country, saying, o “Here we are. We will go up to the
place that the LORD has promised, for we have sinned.” 41[†] p But Moses
said, “Why now are you transgressing the command of the LORD, when that
will not succeed? 42 q Do not go up, r for the Lord is not among you, lest
you be struck down before your enemies. 43For there s the Amalekites and
the Canaanites are facing you, and you shall fall by the sword. Because you
have turned back from following the LORD, the LORD will not be with you.”
44 t But they presumed to go up to the heights of the hill country, although
neither u the ark of the covenant of the LORD nor Moses departed out of the
camp. 45Then v the Amalekites and the Canaanites who lived in that hill
country came down and defeated them and pursued them, even to
w Hormah.
Laws About Sacrifices