OBADIAH 1 [†]The vision of Obadiah.
Edom Will Be Humbled
Thus says the Lord GOD a concerning Edom:
b We have heard a report from the LORD,
and a messenger has been sent among the nations:
“Rise up! Let us rise against her for battle!”
2[†] Behold, I will make you small among the nations;
you shall be utterly despised. [1]
3 c The pride of your heart has deceived you,
you who live in the clefts of the rock, [2]
in your lofty dwelling,
d who say in your heart,
“Who will bring me down to the ground?”
4 Though you soar aloft like the eagle,
though your nest is set among the stars,
from there I will bring you down,
declares the LORD.
5[†] If e thieves came to you,
if plunderers came by night—
how you have been destroyed!—
would they not steal only enough for themselves?
If e grape gatherers came to you,
would they not leave gleanings?
6 f How Esau has been pillaged,
his treasures sought out!
7[†] All your allies have driven you to your border;
those at peace with you have deceived you;
they have prevailed against you;
g those who eat your bread [3] have set a trap beneath you—
h you have [4] no understanding.
8[†] i Will I not on that day, declares the LORD,
destroy the wise men out of Edom,
and understanding out of j Mount Esau?
9 And your mighty men shall be dismayed, k O Teman,
so that every man from j Mount Esau will be cut off by slaughter.
Edom’s Violence Against Jacob
10[†] l Because of the violence done to your brother Jacob,
shame shall cover you,
m and you shall be cut off forever.
11 n On the day that you stood aloof,
o on the day that strangers carried off his wealth
and foreigners entered his gates
p and cast lots for Jerusalem,
you were like one of them.
12[†] q But do not gloat over the day of your brother
in the day of his misfortune;
r do not rejoice over the people of Judah
in the day of their ruin;
s do not boast [5]
in the day of distress.
13 t Do not enter the gate of my people
in the day of their calamity;
t do not gloat over his disaster
in the day of his calamity;
u do not loot his wealth
in the day of his calamity.
14 v Do not stand at the crossroads
to cut off his fugitives;
do not hand over his survivors
in the day of distress.
The Day of the LORD Is Near
15[†] For w the day of the LORD is near upon all the nations.
x As you have done, it shall be done to you;
your deeds shall return on your own head.
16[†] y For as you have drunk on z my holy mountain,
so all the nations shall drink continually;
they shall drink and swallow,
and shall be as though they had never been.
17[†] a But in Mount Zion there shall be those who escape,
and it shall be holy,
b and the house of Jacob shall possess their own possessions.
18 c The house of Jacob shall be a fire,
and the house of Joseph a flame,
and the house of Esau d stubble;
they shall burn them and consume them,
e and there shall be no survivor for the house of Esau,
for the LORD has spoken.
The Kingdom of the LORD
19[†] Those of f the Negeb b shall possess g Mount Esau,
and those of the Shephelah shall possess h the land of the Philistines;
they shall possess the land of Ephraim and the land of i Samaria,
and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.
20 The exiles of this host of the people of Israel
shall possess the land of the Canaanites as far as j Zarephath,
and the exiles of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad
shall possess the cities of the Negeb.
21[†] k Saviors shall go up to Mount Zion
to rule g Mount Esau,
and l the kingdom shall be the LORD’s.
Study Notes for Obadiah
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 1 Thus says the Lord GOD was a common expression
among the prophets, indicating that the prophet reports God’s own words.
Rise up! God is calling the nations to go to war against Edom (compare Isa.
13:2–5).
FACT
A call to arms. Alliances and treaties in the ancient world were important
in times of war, just as they are today around the globe. Allies supported
each other by combining forces against the enemy. Messengers could be
sent to allies requesting soldiers, supplies, and even intelligence on
enemy troop movements and strength. In vv. 1–14, Obadiah warns Edom
that it will be destroyed by its former allies.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 2–4 Edom is insignificant among the nations. Just as
Edom gloated over Judah (vv. 12–13), so other nations disrespect Edom.
This contrasts with Edom’s own pride. The Edomites dwell in the
mountainous region east of the Arabah, with elevations up to 5,000 feet (1.5
km) above sea level. Their inaccessible location has given them false hopes
of security.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 5–6 Edom will be thoroughly destroyed, with nothing
remaining.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 7 The past-tense verbs speak about a future event as
though it were already completed (compare vv. 5–6). Just as Edom betrayed
its own brother Jacob (vv. 10, 12), so Edom’s own allies will turn against it.
Those who eat your bread is a term for allies, since treaties were often
sealed by covenant meals (compare Ps. 41:9).
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 8–9 On that day refers back to vv. 1–7 and looks
toward “the day of the LORD” in v. 15. Neither Edom’s political skill nor its
military strength can provide national security (compare Jer. 49:7, 22).
Teman is the name of Esau’s grandson (Gen. 36:9–11). Here it refers either
to Edom as a whole or to its southern region. Mount Esau. Another name
for Edom.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 10–11 On the day that you stood aloof . . . you were
like one of them criticizes the Edomites for failing to give military support
to neighboring Jerusalem when it was wrongfully attacked.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 12–14 These verses spell out Edom’s violent acts. The
Edomites took advantage of Judah’s situation during the Babylonian crisis
(Ps. 137:7; Ezek. 25:12–14; 35:1–36:7).
OBADIAH
The only thing known about the prophet Obadiah is his name, which
means “one who serves Yahweh.” The book of Obadiah is an indictment
against the nation of Edom, who took advantage of Judah during the
Babylonian crisis. Rather than come to Judah’s aid, the Edomites gloated
over the nation’s demise, looted valuables, and sold captives as slaves.
Their actions were particularly shameful since the Edomites were
descendants of Esau and thus brothers to the people of Judah. Edom is
the target of Obadiah’s prophecy of doom because it is a shameful
example of hostility toward God’s people. Even though Jerusalem’s fall
was a result of the nation’s unfaithfulness—and Edom was one of God’s
tools for bringing judgment—the Lord punished those who oppose his
people. (Obadiah 10–11)
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 15 The Edomites should stop harming God’s people
because (For) the day of God’s universal judgment is near. On the day of
the LORD, see note on Amos 5:18–20; see also The Day of the Lord in the
Prophets.) As you have done. The link between misdeeds and judgment
shows the punishment to be appropriate, fair, and deserved.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 16 As you have drunk is a common biblical metaphor
(compare Isa. 51:17–23; Jer. 25:15–29; Ezek. 23:31–34; Rev. 14:10).
Experiencing God’s wrath is like getting drunk on wine that brings pain and
destruction instead of joy.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 17 Mount Zion is the place where Yahweh dwelt
among and for his people. Those taking refuge in him will be delivered
from the coming wrath (Isa. 14:32). Zion’s blessings were available to
Gentiles (1 Kings 8:41–43; Isa. 2:2–4). Their own possessions is a
reference to the Promised Land, as clarified in Obad. 19–20.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 19–20 All of Israel, including the exiles far away, will
return. Much of the Promised Land was lost over the years, but all of it will
be regained.
OBADIAH—NOTE ON 21 Saviors. Those appointed by God to deliver the
people and bring just government. The Lord has always been King over the
nations (v. 1), but here the prophet promises God’s future rule from Mount
Zion, that is, Jerusalem. Jesus will rule over the whole earth when he
returns (Matt. 25:34).
J o n a h
(return to table of contents)
Jonah 1 • Jonah 2 • Jonah 3 • Jonah 4
Introduction to Jonah
Timeline
Author and Date
Overview
Theme
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Jonah
Global Message of Jonah
Jonah in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Jonah
The Global Message of Jonah for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Jonah
Introduction to Jonah
Timeline
Author and Date
Jonah prophesied during the peaceful and prosperous time of Jeroboam II (2
Kings 14:23–28), who ruled in Israel (the northern kingdom) from 782 to 753
B.C. This was a time when Assyria was not a threat to Israel.
Overview
The Lord called Jonah to go to the great Assyrian city of Nineveh to pronounce
judgment on it. Jonah attempted to escape the Lord’s calling by sailing from
the seaport of Joppa to Tarshish, which was probably on the shores of the
western Mediterranean. Eventually he obeyed the Lord and traveled overland
to Nineveh.
Theme
The primary theme in Jonah is that God’s compassion is boundless, not limited
just to “us” (Jonah and the Israelites) but also available for “them” (the pagan
sailors and the Ninevites).
Key Themes
1. God is in sovereign control over all events on the earth.
2. God is determined to get his message to the nations.
3. People need to repent from sin in general, and from self-centeredness and
hypocrisy in particular.
4. God promises that he will forgive when people repent.
Outline
The story of Jonah includes seven episodes, with the first three paralleled by
the second three. The final episode stands alone as the climax of the story:
I. A. Jonah’s commissioning and flight (1:1–3)
II. B. Jonah and the pagan sailors (1:4–16)
III. C. Jonah’s grateful prayer (1:17–2:10)
IV . A'. Jonah’s recommissioning and compliance (3:1–3a)
V . B'. Jonah and the pagan Ninevites (3:3b–10)
VI. C'. Jonah’s angry prayer (4:1–4)
VII. D. Jonah’s lesson about compassion (4:5–11)
The Setting of Jonah
c. 760 B.C.
Jonah prophesied during the prosperous time of King Jeroboam II of Israel
(2 Kings 14:23–28). During this time the Assyrians were occupied with matters
elsewhere in the empire, allowing Jeroboam II to capture much of Syria for
Israel. The Lord called Jonah to go to the great Assyrian city of Nineveh to
pronounce judgment upon it. Jonah attempted to escape the Lord’s calling by
sailing to Tarshish, which was probably in the western Mediterranean.
Eventually he obeyed the Lord and went to Nineveh, at the heart of the
Assyrian Empire.
The Global Message of Jonah
The theme of Jonah is God’s saving mercy toward the nations of the world.
The Lord’s compassion is not only for insiders like Jonah and Israel but also
for outsiders like the Ninevites. Jonah vividly displays the heart of mercy
God has for all people groups of the world, even those known for their
godlessness. If only they will repent, God’s compassion is available to any
persons from any nation or ethnicity.
Jonah in Redemptive History
God’ s global intent. God called Adam and Eve to “be fruitful and multiply
and fill the earth and subdue it” (Gen. 1:28). This commission was hindered
with the fall into sin, but was given in grace once more to Noah and then to
Abraham and the patriarchs (Gen. 8:17; 9:1; 17:20; 28:3; 35:11). Abraham,
however, was called not only to be fruitful and become “a great nation” but
also to “be a blessing” so that “in you all the families of the earth shall be
blessed” (Gen. 12:2–3). Abraham and his children were to be a channel of
divine blessing to the whole world.
Built into the Old Testament story from very early on, then, is God’s
desire to reach the ends of the earth with his goodness and saving mercy.
Israel was not called out and chosen by God solely for her own sake—she
was called out so that she might bring blessing to the nations (Isa. 42:6–7;
49:6). Part of the tragedy of Israel’s persistent faithlessness and idolatry
over many generations was their ethnocentrism: they turned their focus
inward rather than spreading divine blessing to the nations around them.
Paul speaks of Israel’s failure in this regard many times, as in his letter to
the Romans (Rom. 2:1–29). Jesus too addresses the Jewish failure to bring
God’s blessing to the nations, as in the parable of the tenants (Matt. 21:33–
46; compare Luke 24:47; John 10:16; Acts 1:8).
Jonah’ s role in God’ s global intent. This inward focus of Israel is also
seen in Jonah. The prophet at first refuses to go to Nineveh, the godless
Assyrian city, because, he says, “I knew that you are a gracious God and
merciful, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love, and relenting from
disaster” (Jonah 4:2). Jonah failed to see that God’s compassion was for all
people; the very “steadfast love” he had received in the belly of the great
fish (2:8) was the “steadfast love” he did not want to share with the nations
(4:2), yet which they desperately needed, and which God stood ready to
give to them.
With the coming of Christ, the blessing of God finally begins to flood out
to the nations. Indeed, Jesus’ commission at the end of Matthew’s Gospel
picks up and extends the commission given to Adam and Eve to be fruitful
and subdue the earth, multiplying not only physically but also spiritually
(“make disciples of all nations”; Matt. 28:19). And one day the blessing
experienced by the Ninevites will be fulfilled in cosmic proportions as Jesus
Christ is worshiped by a “ransomed people for God from every tribe and
language and people and nation” (Rev. 5:9).
Universal Themes in Jonah
The compassion of God. This is the key theme of Jonah. It is the note on
which the book ends, as the Lord asks a despondent Jonah, “Should not I
pity Nineveh, that great city, in which there are more than 120,000 persons
who do not know their right hand from their left, and also much cattle?”
(Jonah 4:11). God’s merciful compassion is not restricted to insiders. His
mercy is for all who repent. Divine compassion is shown not to those who
think they deserve such compassion but to those who receive it with
repentance and humility—as the Ninevites did.
God’ s sovereign purposes. God does whatever it takes—from a storm at
sea to a great fish to the miraculous response of repentance by the Ninevites
—to bring his boundless compassion to the nations. As Jonathan said to his
armor bearer, “nothing can hinder the LORD from saving by many or by
few” (1 Sam. 14:6). God delights to invite his people’s glad participation in
what he is doing in the world, yet he is not bound by their obedience or
disobedience. No matter how God’s people respond, God will accomplish
his saving purposes for the world.
The universal need for grace. The Ninevites needed grace for their
wickedness. But Jonah, the insider, the prophet, also needed grace. He was
shown grace in the belly of the fish, and yet his heart remained stubborn
even at the end of the story. He is resentful, refusing to feel the same pity
for Nineveh that he felt for a small plant (Jonah 4:5–10). In short, he is a
sinner—a hard-hearted man who is in need of mercy, the same mercy that
God extended to the Ninevites. The steadfast love shown to Israel is needed
by Israelites just as much as by the godless nations to whom Israel was
called to bring it. The story stops where it does precisely in order to make
this point.
The Global Message of Jonah for Today
The message of Jonah is an urgent call for the global church to extend to
others the compassion they themselves have received.
One way we do this is through tangible acts of love such as financial
generosity, hospitality, sharing of resources and personal possessions, and
advocacy on behalf of those in need politically or socially. One thinks, for
instance, of the alarming rate at which human trafficking and slavery are
spreading. Such horrors demand active advocacy.
A second and even more crucial way we can extend compassion to others
is through the spoken word, just as Jonah did (Jonah 3:3–4). Mindful of the
“steadfast love” God has shown to us in Christ, we speak to others of the
same steadfast love that is available to all the peoples of the world,
regardless of class, ethnicity, or any other socially defining marker. The
gospel of Christ crucified is that which is “of first importance” (1 Cor.
15:3), and we gladly and courageously pass it on to those who have not
heard it.
We speak the gospel to lost people with confidence, knowing that the
results are in God’s hands. Humanly speaking, no one in Nineveh was less
likely to respond to Jonah’s preaching than the king. But God sovereignly
caused Jonah’s preaching to pierce the hearts of the Ninevites, “from the
greatest of them to the least of them,” including the king (Jonah 3:5–9)!
Jonah Flees the Presence of the LORD