PROVERBS 25 [†]These also are m proverbs of Solomon which the men of
Hezekiah king of Judah copied.
2[†] It is the glory of God to n conceal things,
but the glory of kings is to o search things out.
3 As the heavens for height, and the earth for depth,
so the heart of kings is p unsearchable.
4[†] Take away q the dross from the silver,
and r the smith has material for a vessel;
5 take away s the wicked from the presence of the king,
and his t throne will be established in righteousness.
6[†] Do not put yourself forward in the king’s presence
or stand in the place of the great,
7[†] for u it is better to be told, “Come up here,”
than to be put lower in the presence of a noble.
What your eyes have seen
8 w do not hastily bring into court,
for [1] what will you do in the end,
when your neighbor puts you to shame?
9
x Argue your case with your neighbor himself,
and do not reveal another’s secret,
10 lest he who hears you bring shame upon you,
and your ill repute have no end.
11 y A word fitly spoken
is like apples of gold in a setting of silver.
12 Like z a gold ring or an ornament of gold
is a wise reprover to a a listening ear.
13[†] Like the cold of snow in the time of harvest
is b a faithful messenger to those who send him;
he refreshes the soul of his masters.
14 Like c clouds and wind without rain
is a man who d boasts of a gift he does not give.
15 With e patience a ruler may be persuaded,
and a soft tongue will break a bone.
16[†] If you have f found honey, eat g only enough for you,
lest you have your fill of it and vomit it.
17 Let your foot be seldom in your neighbor’s house,
lest he have his fill of you and hate you.
18 A man who h bears false witness against his neighbor
is like a war club, or i a sword, or a sharp arrow.
19 Trusting in a treacherous man in time of trouble
is like a bad tooth or a foot that slips.
20[†] Whoever j sings songs to a heavy heart
is like one who takes off a garment on a cold day,
and like vinegar on soda.
21[†] k If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat,
and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink,
22 for you will heap l burning coals on his head,
and the LORD will reward you.
23[†] The north wind brings forth rain,
and a backbiting tongue, angry looks.
24 m It is better to live in a corner of the housetop
than in a house shared with a quarrelsome wife.
25 Like cold water to n a thirsty soul,
so is o good news from a far country.
26 Like p a muddied spring or a polluted fountain
is a righteous man who gives way before the wicked.
27 It is q not good to eat much honey,
nor is it glorious to r seek one’s own glory. [2]
28[†] A man s without self-control
is like t a city broken into and left without walls.
PROVERBS 26 Like snow in summer or u rain in harvest,
so v honor is w not fitting for a fool.
2 Like x a sparrow in its flitting, like a swallow in its flying,
y a curse that is causeless does not alight.
3 z A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey,
and a a rod for the back of fools.
4[†] b Answer not a fool according to his folly,
lest you be like him yourself.
5 c Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he be d wise in his own eyes.
6 Whoever sends a message by the hand of a fool
cuts off his own feet and e drinks violence.
7 Like a lame man’s legs, which hang useless,
is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
8 Like one who binds the stone in the sling
is f one who gives honor to a fool.
9 Like g a thorn that goes up into the hand of a drunkard
is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
10 Like an archer who wounds everyone
is one who hires a passing fool or drunkard. [1]
11 Like h a dog that returns to his vomit
is i a fool who repeats his folly.
12[†] Do you see a man who is j wise in his own eyes?
k There is more hope for a fool than for him.
13[†] l The sluggard says, “There is a lion in the road!
There is a lion in the streets!”
14 As a door turns on its hinges,
so does a sluggard on his bed.
15
m The sluggard buries his hand in the dish;
it wears him out to bring it back to his mouth.
16 The sluggard is j wiser in his own eyes
n than seven men who can answer sensibly.
17[†] Whoever meddles in a quarrel not his own
is like one who takes a passing dog by the ears.
18 Like a madman who throws o firebrands, arrows, and death
19 is the man who deceives his neighbor
and says, “I am only joking!”
20 For lack of wood the fire goes out,
and where there is no p whisperer, q quarreling ceases.
21 As charcoal to hot embers and wood to fire,
so is r a quarrelsome man for kindling strife.
22
s The words of p a whisperer are like delicious morsels;
they go down into the inner parts of the body.
23[†] t Like the u glaze [2] covering an earthen vessel
are fervent lips with an evil heart.
24 Whoever hates disguises himself with his lips
and harbors deceit in his heart;
25
v when he speaks graciously, believe him not,
for there are w seven abominations in his heart;
26 though his hatred be covered with deception,
his wickedness will be exposed in the assembly.
27
x Whoever digs a pit will fall into it,
and a stone will come back on him who starts it rolling.
28 A lying tongue hates its victims,
and a flattering mouth works ruin.