PROVERBS 12 [†] Whoever loves discipline loves knowledge,
but he who z hates reproof is a stupid.
2 A good man b obtains favor from the LORD,
but a man of evil devices he condemns.
3 No one is established by wickedness,
but the root of c the righteous will never be moved.
4[†] d An excellent wife is e the crown of her husband,
but she who f brings shame is like g rottenness in his bones.
5[†] h The thoughts of the righteous are just;
the counsels of the wicked are deceitful.
6 The words of the wicked i lie in wait for blood,
but j the mouth of the upright delivers them.
7
k The wicked are l overthrown and are no more,
m but the house of the righteous will stand.
8 A man is commended according to his good sense,
but one of twisted mind is n despised.
9[†] Better to be lowly and have a servant
than to play the great man and lack bread.
10 o Whoever is righteous has regard for the life of his beast,
but the mercy of the wicked is cruel.
11
p Whoever works his land q will have plenty of bread,
r but he who follows s worthless pursuits lacks sense.
12[†] Whoever is wicked covets t the spoil of evildoers,
but the root of the righteous bears fruit.
13 An evil man is ensnared u by the transgression of his lips,
v but the righteous escapes from trouble.
14 From the fruit of his mouth w a man is satisfied with good,
x and the work of a man’s hand comes back to him.
15[†] y The way of a fool is right in his own eyes,
but a wise man listens to advice.
16[†] z The vexation of a fool is known at once,
but the prudent ignores an insult.
17 a Whoever speaks [1] the truth gives honest evidence,
but b a false witness utters deceit.
18[†] c There is one whose rash words are like sword thrusts,
but the tongue of the wise brings d healing.
19 Truthful lips endure forever,
but e a lying tongue is but for a moment.
20 Deceit is in the heart of f those who devise evil,
but those who plan peace have joy.
21
g No ill befalls the righteous,
but the wicked are filled with trouble.
22 h Lying lips are i an abomination to the LORD,
j but those who act faithfully are his delight.
23
k A prudent man conceals knowledge,
k but the heart of fools proclaims folly.
24
l The hand of the diligent will rule,
while the slothful will be m put to forced labor.
25 n Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs him down,
but a good word makes him glad.
26 One who is righteous is a guide to his neighbor, [2]
but the way of the wicked leads them astray.
27 o Whoever is slothful will not roast his game,
but the diligent man will get precious wealth. [3]
28
p In the path of righteousness is life,
and in its pathway there is no death.