PSALM 119 [†] [1] Blessed are those whose k way is blameless,
who l walk in the law of the LORD!
2[†] Blessed are those who m keep his n testimonies,
who o seek him with their whole heart,
3 who also p do no wrong,
but walk in his ways!
4 You have commanded your q precepts
to be kept diligently.
5[†] Oh that my ways may r be steadfast
in keeping your statutes!
6
s Then I shall not be put to shame,
having my eyes fixed on all your commandments.
7 I will praise you with an upright heart,
when I learn t your righteous rules. [2]
8 I will keep your statutes;
u do not utterly forsake me!
Beth
9 How can v a young man keep his way pure?
By guarding it according to your word.
10
w With my whole heart I seek you;
let me not x wander from your commandments!
11 I have y stored up your word in my heart,
that I might not sin against you.
12 Blessed are you, O LORD;
z teach me your statutes!
13 With my lips I a declare
all the rules [3] of your mouth.
14 In the way of your testimonies I b delight
as much as in all c riches.
15 I will d meditate on your precepts
and fix my eyes on your e ways.
16 I will f delight in your statutes;
I will not forget your word.
Gimel
17 g Deal bountifully with your servant,
h that I may live and keep your word.
18[†] Open my eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of your law.
19 I am i a sojourner on the earth;
j hide not your commandments from me!
20 My soul is consumed with k longing
for your rules [4] at all times.
21[†] You rebuke l the insolent, m accursed ones,
who n wander from your commandments.
22 Take away from me o scorn and contempt,
p for I have kept your testimonies.
23[†] Even though q princes sit plotting against me,
your servant will r meditate on your statutes.
24 Your testimonies are my s delight;
they are my t counselors.
Daleth
25
u My soul clings to the dust;
v give me life w according to your word!
26 When x I told of my ways, you answered me;
y teach me your statutes!
27 z Make me understand the way of your precepts,
and I will a meditate on your wondrous works.
28
b My soul melts away for sorrow;
strengthen me according to your word!
29 Put false ways far from me
and graciously c teach me your law!
30 I have chosen the way of faithfulness;
I d set your rules before me.
31 I cling to your testimonies, O LORD;
e let me not be put to shame!
32[†] I will run in the way of your commandments
when you f enlarge my heart! [5]
He
33 g Teach me, O LORD, the way of your statutes;
and I will keep it h to the end. [6]
34 i Give me understanding, that I may keep your law
and observe it with my whole heart.
35 j Lead me in the path of your commandments,
for I k delight in it.
36[†] l Incline my heart to your testimonies,
and not to m selfish gain!
37
n Turn my eyes from looking at worthless things;
and o give me life in your ways.
38 p Confirm to your servant your promise,
q that you may be feared.
39 Turn away the r reproach that I dread,
for your rules are good.
40 Behold, I s long for your precepts;
t in your righteousness give me life!
Waw
41[†] Let your u steadfast love come to me, O LORD,
your salvation v according to your promise;
42 then w shall I have an answer for him r who taunts me,
for I trust in your word.
43 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth,
for my x hope is in your rules.
44 I will keep your law continually,
forever and ever,
45 and I shall walk y in a wide place,
for I have z sought your precepts.
46 I will also speak of your testimonies a before kings
and shall not be put to shame,
47 for I b find my delight in your commandments,
which I love.
48 I will c lift up my hands toward your commandments, which I love,
and I will d meditate on your statutes.
Zayin
49 Remember e your word to your servant,
in which you have made me f hope.
50 This is g my comfort in my affliction,
that your promise h gives me life.
51
i The insolent utterly deride me,
but I do not j turn away from your law.
52 When I think of your rules from of old,
I take comfort, O LORD.
53
k Hot indignation seizes me because of the wicked,
who forsake your law.
54 Your statutes have been my songs
in the house of my l sojourning.
55 I m remember your name in the night, O LORD,
and keep your law.
56 This blessing has fallen to me,
that n I have kept your precepts.
Heth
57[†] o The LORD is my portion;
I promise to keep your words.
58 I p entreat your favor with all my heart;
be gracious to me q according to your promise.
59[†] When I r think on my ways,
I turn my feet to your testimonies;
60 I hasten and do not delay
to keep your commandments.
61 Though s the cords of the wicked ensnare me,
I do not t forget your law.
62 At u midnight I rise to praise you,
because of your v righteous rules.
63
w I am a companion of all who fear you,
of those who keep your precepts.
64 x The earth, O LORD, is full of your steadfast love;
y teach me your statutes!
Teth
65 You have dealt well with your servant,
O LORD, z according to your word.
66 Teach me a good judgment and knowledge,
for I believe in your commandments.
67
b Before I was afflicted I went astray,
but now I keep your word.
68 c You are good and do good;
d teach me your statutes.
69
e The insolent f smear me with lies,
but with my whole heart I g keep your precepts;
70 their heart is unfeeling h like fat,
but I i delight in your law.
71 It is j good for me that I was afflicted,
that I might learn your statutes.
72
k The law of your mouth is better to me
than thousands of gold and silver pieces.
Yodh
73 l Your hands have made and fashioned me;
m give me understanding that I may learn your commandments.
74 Those who fear you shall see me and n rejoice,
because I have o hoped in your word.
75 I know, O LORD, that your rules are p righteous,
and that in q faithfulness you have afflicted me.
76[†] Let your steadfast love comfort me
according to your promise to your servant.
77 Let your r mercy come to me, that I may live;
for your law is my s delight.
78 Let t the insolent be put to u shame,
because they have v wronged me with falsehood;
as for me, I will w meditate on your precepts.
79 Let those who fear you x turn to me,
that they may know your testimonies.
80 May my heart be y blameless in your statutes,
z that I may not be put to shame!
Kaph
81 My soul a longs for your salvation;
I b hope in your word.
82 My c eyes long for your promise;
I ask, d “When will you comfort me?”
83[†] For I have e become like a f wineskin in the smoke,
yet I have not forgotten your statutes.
84 g How long must your servant endure? [7]
h When will you judge those who persecute me?
85 i The insolent have j dug pitfalls for me;
they do not live according to your law.
86 All your commandments are k sure;
they persecute me l with falsehood; m help me!
87 They have almost made an end of me on earth,
but I have not forsaken your precepts.
88 In your steadfast love n give me life,
that I may keep the testimonies of your mouth.
Lamedh
89 Forever, O LORD, your o word
is firmly fixed in the heavens.
90 Your p faithfulness endures to all generations;
you have q established the earth, and it r stands fast.
91 By your s appointment they stand this day,
for all things are your servants.
92 If your law had not been my t delight,
I would have perished in my affliction.
93 I will never forget your precepts,
for by them you have u given me life.
94 I am yours; save me,
v for I have sought your precepts.
95 The wicked lie in wait to destroy me,
but I consider your testimonies.
96 I have seen a limit to all perfection,
but your commandment is exceedingly w broad.
Mem
97 Oh how x I love your law!
It is my y meditation all the day.
98[†] Your commandment makes me z wiser than my enemies,
for it is ever with me.
99 I have more understanding than all my teachers,
for a your testimonies are my meditation.
100 I understand more than b the aged, [8]
for I c keep your precepts.
101 I d hold back my feet from every evil way,
in order to keep your word.
102 I do not turn aside from your rules,
for you have taught me.
103 How e sweet are your words to my taste,
sweeter than honey to my mouth!
104 Through your precepts I get understanding;
therefore f I hate every false way.
Nun
105[†] g Your word is a lamp to my feet
and a light to my path.
106 I have h sworn an oath and confirmed it,
to keep your i righteous rules.
107 I am severely j afflicted;
k give me life, O LORD, according to your word!
108 Accept l my freewill offerings of praise, O LORD,
and m teach me your rules.
109 I hold my life n in my hand continually,
but I do not o forget your law.
110 The wicked have laid p a snare for me,
but q I do not stray from your precepts.
111 Your testimonies are r my heritage forever,
for they are s the joy of my heart.
112 I t incline my heart to perform your statutes
forever, u to the end. [9]
Samekh
113[†] I hate v the double-minded,
but I love w your law.
114 You are my x hiding place and my y shield;
I z hope in your word.
115
a Depart from me, you evildoers,
that I may b keep the commandments of my God.
116 Uphold me c according to your promise, that I may live,
and let me not be d put to shame in my e hope!
117 f Hold me up, that I may be safe
and have regard for your statutes continually!
118 You g spurn all who h go astray from your statutes,
for their cunning is in vain.
119 All the wicked of the earth you discard like i dross,
therefore j I love your testimonies.
120 My flesh k trembles for fear of you,
and I am afraid of your judgments.
Ayin
121 I have done what is just and right;
do not leave me to my oppressors.
122 Give your servant l a pledge of good;
let not m the insolent oppress me.
123 My n eyes long for your salvation
and for the fulfillment of your righteous promise.
124 Deal with your servant according to your steadfast love,
and o teach me your statutes.
125 I am your p servant; q give me understanding,
that I may know your testimonies!
126[†] It is time for the LORD to act,
for your law has been broken.
127 Therefore I r love your commandments
above gold, above fine gold.
128 Therefore I consider all your precepts to be right;
I hate every s false way.
Pe
129[†] Your testimonies are t wonderful;
therefore my soul u keeps them.
130[†] The unfolding of your words gives light;
it imparts v understanding to the simple.
131 I w open my mouth and x pant,
because I y long for your commandments.
132 z Turn to me and be gracious to me,
as is your way with those who love your name.
133
a Keep steady my steps according to your promise,
and let no iniquity b get dominion over me.
134 c Redeem me from man’s oppression,
that I may keep your precepts.
135
d Make your face shine upon your servant,
and e teach me your statutes.
136 My eyes f shed streams of tears,
because people g do not keep your law.
Tsadhe
137
h Righteous are you, O LORD,
and right are your rules.
138 You have appointed your testimonies in i righteousness
and in all j faithfulness.
139 My k zeal consumes me,
because my foes forget your words.
140 Your promise is well l tried,
and your servant m loves it.
141 I am small and despised,
yet I do not n forget your precepts.
142 Your righteousness is righteous forever,
and your law is o true.
143 Trouble and anguish have found me out,
but your commandments are my p delight.
144 Your testimonies are righteous forever;
q give me understanding that I may r live.
Qoph
145 With my s whole heart I cry; answer me, O LORD!
I will t keep your statutes.
146 I call to you; save me,
that I may observe your testimonies.
147 I rise before u dawn and cry for help;
I v hope in your words.
148 My eyes are awake before w the watches of the night,
that I may meditate on your promise.
149 Hear my voice according to your steadfast love;
O LORD, x according to your justice y give me life.
150 They draw near who persecute me with evil purpose;
they are far from your law.
151 But z you are near, O LORD,
and all your commandments are a true.
152 Long have I known from your testimonies
that you have b founded them forever.
Resh
153 Look on my c affliction and deliver me,
for d I do not forget your law.
154 e Plead my cause and redeem me;
f give me life according to your promise!
155[†] g Salvation is far from the wicked,
h for they do not seek your statutes.
156 i Great is your mercy, O LORD;
f give me life according to your rules.
157 j Many are my persecutors and my adversaries,
but I do not k swerve from your testimonies.
158 I look at l the faithless with m disgust,
because they do not keep your commands.
159 Consider how I n love your precepts!
f Give me life according to your steadfast love.
160
o The sum of your word is p truth,
and every one of your q righteous rules endures forever.
Sin and Shin
161
r Princes persecute me s without cause,
but my heart t stands in awe of your words.
162 I t rejoice at your word
like one who u finds great spoil.
163 I hate and abhor falsehood,
but I love v your law.
164 Seven times a day I praise you
for your q righteous rules.
165 Great w peace have those who love your law;
x nothing can make them stumble.
166 I y hope for your salvation, O LORD,
and I do your commandments.
167 My soul keeps your testimonies;
I v love them exceedingly.
168[†] I keep your precepts and testimonies,
z for all my ways are before you.
Taw
169 Let my a cry come before you, O LORD;
b give me understanding c according to your word!
170 Let my plea come before you;
d deliver me according to your word.
171 My lips will e pour forth praise,
for you f teach me your statutes.
172 My tongue will sing of your word,
for g all your commandments are right.
173 Let your hand be ready to help me,
for I have h chosen your precepts.
174 I i long for your salvation, O LORD,
and your law is my j delight.
175 Let my soul live and praise you,
and let your rules help me.
176[†] I have k gone astray like a lost sheep; seek your servant,
for I do not l forget your commandments.
Deliver Me, O LORD
A Song of m Ascents.