PSALM 59 [†] a Deliver me from my enemies, O my God;
b protect me from those who c rise up against me;
2 deliver me from d those who work evil,
and save me from e bloodthirsty men.
3 For behold, they f lie in wait for my life;
fierce men g stir up strife against me.
h For no transgression or sin of mine, O LORD,
4 for no fault of mine, they run and make ready.
i Awake, come to meet me, and see!
5[†] You, j LORD God of hosts, are God of Israel.
Rouse yourself to punish all the nations;
spare none of those who treacherously plot evil. Selah
6[†] Each evening they k come back,
howling like dogs
and prowling about the city.
7 There they are, l bellowing with their mouths
with m swords in their lips—
for n “Who,” they think, [2] “will hear us?”
8 But you, O LORD, o laugh at them;
you hold all the nations in derision.
9 O my Strength, I will watch for you,
for you, O God, are p my fortress.
10 q My God in his steadfast love [3] r will meet me;
God will let me s look in triumph on my enemies.
11[†] Kill them not, lest my people forget;
make them totter [4] by your power and t bring them down,
O Lord, our u shield!
12 For v the sin of their mouths, the words of their lips,
let them be trapped in their pride.
For the cursing and lies that they utter,
13
w consume them in wrath;
consume them till they are no more,
that they may x know that God rules over Jacob
to y the ends of the earth. Selah
14
z Each evening they come back,
howling like dogs
and prowling about the city.
15 They a wander about for food
and growl if they do not get their fill.
16 But I will sing of your strength;
I will sing aloud of your steadfast love in the morning.
For you have been to me b a fortress
and c a refuge in d the day of my distress.
17 O my Strength, I will sing praises to you,
for you, O God, b are my fortress,
e the God who shows me steadfast love.
He Will Tread Down Our Foes
To the choirmaster: according to f Shushan Eduth. A g Miktam [1] of David; h for instruction; when
he i strove with Aram-naharaim and with Aram-zobah, and when Joab on his return struck down
twelve thousand of Edom in the Valley of Salt.