PSALM 37 [†] u Fret not yourself because of evildoers;
be not v envious of wrongdoers!
2 For they will soon w fade like x the grass
and wither y like the green herb.
3
z Trust in the LORD, and do good;
a dwell in the land and befriend faithfulness. [2]
4[†] b Delight yourself in the LORD,
and he will c give you the desires of your heart.
5 d Commit your way to the LORD;
z trust in him, and he will act.
6
e He will bring forth your righteousness as the light,
and your justice as f the noonday.
7 g Be still before the LORD and wait patiently for him;
h fret not yourself over the one who i prospers in his way,
over the man who carries out evil devices!
8 j Refrain from anger, and forsake wrath!
h Fret not yourself; it tends only to evil.
9[†] k For the evildoers shall be cut off,
but those who wait for the LORD shall l inherit the land.
10 In m just a little while, the wicked will be no more;
though you look carefully at n his place, he will not be there.
11[†] But o the meek shall inherit the land
and delight themselves in p abundant peace.
12[†] The wicked q plots against the righteous
and r gnashes his teeth at him,
13 but the Lord s laughs at the wicked,
for he sees that his t day is coming.
14 The wicked draw the sword and u bend their bows
to bring down the poor and needy,
to slay those whose v way is upright;
15 their sword shall enter their own heart,
and their w bows shall be broken.
16
x Better is the little that the righteous has
than the abundance of many wicked.
17 For y the arms of the wicked shall be broken,
but the LORD z upholds the righteous.
18 The LORD a knows the days of the blameless,
and their b heritage will remain forever;
19 they are not put to shame in evil times;
in c the days of famine they have abundance.
20 But the wicked will perish;
the enemies of the LORD are like d the glory of the pastures;
they vanish—like e smoke they vanish away.
21[†] The wicked borrows but does not pay back,
but the righteous f is generous and gives;
22 for those blessed by the LORD [3] shall g inherit the land,
but those cursed by him h shall be cut off.
23 The i steps of a man are j established by the LORD,
when he delights in his way;
24
k though he fall, he shall not be cast headlong,
for the LORD l upholds his hand.
25 I have been young, and now am old,
yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken
or his children m begging for bread.
26 He is ever n lending generously,
and his children become a blessing.
27
o Turn away from evil and do good;
so shall you p dwell forever.
28 For the LORD q loves justice;
he will not forsake his r saints.
They are preserved forever,
but the children of the wicked shall be s cut off.
29 The righteous shall inherit the land
and p dwell upon it forever.
30 The mouth of the righteous utters wisdom,
and his tongue speaks justice.
31 t The law of his God is in his heart;
his u steps do not slip.
32[†] The wicked v watches for the righteous
and seeks to put him to death.
33 The LORD will not w abandon him to his power
or let him x be condemned when he is brought to trial.
34
y Wait for the LORD and keep his way,
and he will exalt you to inherit the land;
you will look on z when the wicked are cut off.
35 a I have seen a wicked, ruthless man,
spreading himself like b a green laurel tree. [4]
36 But he passed away, [5] and behold, c he was no more;
though I sought him, he could not be found.
37 Mark the blameless and behold the upright,
for there is a future for the man of d peace.
38 But e transgressors shall be altogether destroyed;
the future of the wicked f shall be cut off.
39 g The salvation of the righteous is from the LORD;
he is their stronghold in h the time of trouble.
40 The LORD helps them and i delivers them;
j he delivers them from the wicked and saves them,
because they k take refuge in him.
Do Not Forsake Me, O LORD
A Psalm of David, l for the memorial offering.