PSALM 71 [†] i In you, O LORD, do I take refuge;
let me never be put to shame!
2 In your righteousness deliver me and rescue me;
incline your ear to me, and save me!
3 Be to me a rock of j refuge,
to which I may continually come;
you have k given the command to save me,
for you are my l rock and my fortress.
4[†] m Rescue me, O my God, from the hand of the wicked,
from the grasp of the unjust and cruel man.
5[†] For you, O Lord, are my n hope,
my trust, O LORD, from my youth.
6 Upon you I have leaned o from before my birth;
you are he who p took me from my mother’s womb.
My praise is continually of you.
7 I have been as q a portent to many,
but you are my strong refuge.
8 My r mouth is filled with your praise,
and with your glory all the day.
9[†] s Do not cast me off in the time of old age;
forsake me not when my strength is spent.
10 For my enemies speak concerning me;
those who t watch for my life u consult together
11 and say, “God has forsaken him;
pursue and seize him,
for there is none to deliver him.”
12 O God, be not v far from me;
O my God, w make haste to help me!
13 May my accusers be x put to shame and consumed;
y with scorn and disgrace may they be covered
who z seek my hurt.
14[†] But I will a hope continually
and will b praise you yet more and more.
15 My c mouth will tell of your righteous acts,
of your deeds of salvation all the day,
for d their number is past my knowledge.
16 With the mighty deeds of the Lord GOD I will come;
I will remind them of your righteousness, yours alone.
17 O God, from my youth you have taught me,
and I still proclaim your wondrous deeds.
18[†] So even to e old age and gray hairs,
O God, f do not forsake me,
until I proclaim your might to another generation,
your power to all those to come.
19 Your g righteousness, O God,
reaches the high heavens.
You who have done h great things,
O God, i who is like you?
20 You who have j made me see many troubles and calamities
will k revive me again;
from the depths of the earth
you will bring me up again.
21 You will increase my greatness
and comfort me again.
22[†] I will also praise you with l the harp
for your faithfulness, O my God;
I will sing praises to you with the lyre,
O m Holy One of Israel.
23 My lips will shout for joy,
when I sing praises to you;
my soul also, which you have n redeemed.
24 And my o tongue will talk of your righteous help all the day long,
for they have been p put to shame and disappointed
who sought to do me hurt.
Give the King Your Justice
Of q Solomon.