PSALM 68 [†] e God shall arise, his enemies shall be f scattered;
and those who hate him shall flee before him!
2 As g smoke is driven away, so you shall drive them away;
h as wax melts before fire,
so the wicked shall perish before God!
3 But i the righteous shall be glad;
they shall exult before God;
they shall be jubilant with joy!
4[†] Sing to God, j sing praises to his name;
k lift up a song to him who l rides through m the deserts;
his name is n the LORD;
exult before him!
5 o Father of the fatherless and p protector of widows
is God in his holy habitation.
6 God q settles the solitary in a home;
he r leads out the prisoners to prosperity,
but s the rebellious dwell in t a parched land.
7[†] O God, when you u went out before your people,
v when you marched through w the wilderness, Selah
8 x the earth quaked, the heavens poured down rain,
before God, the One of Sinai,
before God, the God of Israel.
9 y Rain in abundance, O God, you shed abroad;
you restored your inheritance as it languished;
10 your flock [1] found a dwelling in it;
in your goodness, O God, you z provided for the needy.
11[†] The Lord gives a the word;
b the women who announce the news are a great host:
12 c “The kings of the armies—they flee, they flee!”
The women at home d divide the spoil—
13 though you men lie among e the sheepfolds—
the wings of a dove covered with silver,
its pinions with shimmering gold.
14 When the Almighty scatters kings there,
let snow fall on f Zalmon.
15[†] O mountain of God, mountain of Bashan;
O many-peaked [2] mountain, mountain of Bashan!
16 Why do you look with hatred, O many-peaked mountain,
at the mount that God g desired for his abode,
yes, where the LORD will dwell forever?
17 h The chariots of God are twice ten thousand,
thousands upon thousands;
the Lord is among them; Sinai is now in the sanctuary.
18[†] i You ascended on high,
j leading a host of captives in your train
and k receiving gifts among men,
even among l the rebellious, m that the LORD God may dwell there.
19[†] Blessed be the Lord,
who daily n bears us up;
God is our salvation. Selah
20 Our God is a God of salvation,
o and to GOD, the Lord, belong deliverances from death.
21 p But God will strike the heads of his enemies,
the hairy crown of him who walks in his guilty ways.
22 The Lord said,
“I will bring them back q from Bashan,
r I will bring them back from the depths of the sea,
23 that you may s strike your feet in their blood,
that t the tongues of your dogs may have their portion from the foe.”
24[†] Your procession is [3] seen, O God,
the procession of my God, my King, into the sanctuary—
25
u the singers in front, v the musicians last,
between them w virgins playing tambourines:
26 x “Bless God in the great congregation,
the LORD, O you [4] who are of y Israel’s fountain!”
27 There is z Benjamin, the least of them, in the lead,
the princes of Judah in their throng,
the princes of a Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali.
28[†] b Summon your power, O God, [5]
the power, O God, by which you have worked for us.
29 Because of your temple at Jerusalem
kings shall c bear gifts to you.
30 Rebuke d the beasts that dwell among the reeds,
the herd of e bulls with the calves of the peoples.
f Trample underfoot those who lust after tribute;
scatter the peoples who delight in war. [6]
31 Nobles shall come from g Egypt;
h Cush shall hasten to i stretch out her hands to God.
32[†] j O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God;
sing praises to the Lord, Selah
33 to him k who rides in l the heavens, the ancient heavens;
behold, he m sends out his voice, his mighty voice.
34 n Ascribe power to God,
whose majesty is over Israel,
and whose o power is in p the skies.
35
q Awesome is God from his [7] r sanctuary;
the God of Israel—he is the one who gives s power and strength to
his people.
Blessed be God!
Save Me, O God
To the choirmaster: according to t Lilies. Of David.