PSALM 106 [†] i Praise the LORD!
j Oh give thanks to the LORD, k for he is good,
l for his steadfast love endures forever!
2 Who can utter the mighty deeds of the LORD,
or declare all his praise?
3 Blessed are they who observe justice,
who m do righteousness at all times!
4[†] n Remember me, O LORD, when you show favor to your people;
help me when you save them, [1]
5 that I may look upon the prosperity of your o chosen ones,
that I may rejoice in the gladness of your nation,
that I may glory with your inheritance.
6[†] p Both we and q our fathers have sinned;
we have committed iniquity; we have done wickedness.
7[†] Our fathers, when they were in Egypt,
did not consider your wondrous works;
they r did not remember the abundance of your steadfast love,
but s rebelled by the sea, at the Red Sea.
8 Yet he saved them t for his name’s sake,
u that he might make known his mighty power.
9 He v rebuked the Red Sea, and it w became dry,
and he x led them through the deep as through a desert.
10 So he y saved them from the hand of the foe
and z redeemed them from the power of the enemy.
11 And a the waters covered their adversaries;
not one of them was left.
12 Then b they believed his words;
they c sang his praise.
13[†] But they soon d forgot his works;
they did not wait for e his counsel.
14 But they had f a wanton craving in the wilderness,
and g put God to the test in the desert;
15 he h gave them what they asked,
but sent i a wasting disease among them.
16[†] When men in the camp j were jealous of Moses
and Aaron, k the holy one of the LORD,
17 l the earth opened and swallowed up Dathan,
and covered the company of Abiram.
18 m Fire also broke out in their company;
the flame burned up the wicked.
19[†] They n made a calf in Horeb
and worshiped a metal image.
20 They o exchanged the glory of God [2]
for the image of an ox that eats grass.
21 They p forgot God, their Savior,
who had done great things in Egypt,
22 wondrous works in q the land of Ham,
and awesome deeds by the Red Sea.
23 Therefore r he said he would destroy them—
had not Moses, his s chosen one,
t stood in the breach before him,
to turn away his wrath from destroying them.
24[†] Then they u despised v the pleasant land,
having w no faith in his promise.
25 They x murmured in their tents,
and did not obey the voice of the LORD.
26 Therefore he y raised his hand and swore to them
that he would make them fall in the wilderness,
27 and would make their offspring fall among the nations,
z scattering them among the lands.
28[†] Then they a yoked themselves to the a Baal of Peor,
and ate sacrifices offered to b the dead;
29 they provoked the LORD to anger with their deeds,
and a plague broke out among them.
30 Then c Phinehas stood up and intervened,
and the plague was stayed.
31 And that was d counted to him as righteousness
from generation to generation forever.
32[†] They e angered him at the waters of Meribah,
and it went ill with Moses on their account,
33 for they f made his spirit bitter, [3]
and he g spoke rashly with his lips.
34[†] They did not h destroy the peoples,
i as the LORD commanded them,
35 but they j mixed with the nations
and learned to do as they did.
36 They served their idols,
which became k a snare to them.
37 They l sacrificed their sons
and their daughters to m the demons;
38 they poured out innocent blood,
the blood of their sons and daughters,
whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan,
and the land was n polluted with blood.
39 Thus they o became unclean by their acts,
and p played the whore in their deeds.
40 Then q the anger of the LORD was kindled against r his people,
and he abhorred his r heritage;
41 he s gave them into the hand of the nations,
so that those who hated them ruled over them.
42 Their enemies t oppressed them,
and they were brought into subjection under their power.
43
u Many times he delivered them,
but they were rebellious in their v purposes
and were w brought low through their iniquity.
44 Nevertheless, he looked upon their distress,
when he x heard their cry.
45 For their sake he y remembered his covenant,
and z relented according to a the abundance of his steadfast love.
46 He caused them to be b pitied
by all those who held them captive.
47 c Save us, O LORD our God,
and d gather us from among the nations,
that we may give thanks to your holy name
and glory in your praise.
48[†] e Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
from everlasting to everlasting!
e And let all the people say, “Amen!”
f Praise the LORD!
B O O K F I V E
Let the Redeemed of the LORD Say So