PSALM 18 [†] I love you, O LORD, my strength.
2 The LORD is my i rock and my j fortress and my deliverer,
my God, my i rock, in k whom I take refuge,
my l shield, and m the horn of my salvation, my n stronghold.
3 I call upon the LORD, who is o worthy to be praised,
and I am saved from my enemies.
4 p The cords of death encompassed me;
q the torrents of destruction assailed me; [1]
5
p the cords of Sheol entangled me;
the snares of death confronted me.
6 r In my distress I called upon the LORD;
to my God I cried for help.
From his s temple he heard my voice,
and my cry to him reached his ears.
7[†] Then the earth t reeled and rocked;
the foundations also of the mountains trembled
and quaked, because he was angry.
8 Smoke went up from his nostrils, [2]
and devouring u fire from his mouth;
glowing coals flamed forth from him.
9 He v bowed the heavens and w came down;
x thick darkness was under his feet.
10 He rode on a cherub and flew;
he came swiftly on z the wings of the wind.
11 He made darkness his covering, his a canopy around him,
thick clouds b dark with water.
12 Out of the brightness before him
c hailstones and coals of fire broke through his clouds.
13 The LORD also d thundered in the heavens,
and the Most High uttered his e voice,
hailstones and coals of fire.
14 And he sent out his f arrows and scattered them;
he flashed forth lightnings and g routed them.
15 Then h the channels of the sea were seen,
and the foundations of the world were laid bare
at your i rebuke, O LORD,
at the blast of j the breath of your nostrils.
16 He k sent from on high, he took me;
he l drew me out of m many waters.
17 He rescued me from my strong enemy
and from those who hated me,
for they were n too mighty for me.
18 They confronted me in the day of my calamity,
but the LORD was my support.
19 He brought me out into o a broad place;
he rescued me, because he p delighted in me.
20[†] The LORD dealt with me q according to my righteousness;
according to r the cleanness of my hands he rewarded me.
21 For I have s kept the ways of the LORD,
and have not wickedly departed from my God.
22 For t all his rules [3] were before me,
and his statutes I did not put away from me.
23 I was u blameless before him,
and I kept myself from my guilt.
24 So the LORD has rewarded me according to my righteousness,
according to the cleanness of my hands in his sight.
25 With v the merciful you show yourself merciful;
with the blameless man you show yourself blameless;
26 with the purified you show yourself pure;
and with w the crooked you make yourself seem tortuous.
27 For you save x a humble people,
but y the haughty eyes you bring down.
28 For it is you who light my z lamp;
the LORD my God lightens my darkness.
29 For by you I can run against a troop,
and by my God I can a leap over b a wall.
30[†] This God—his way is c perfect; [4]
the word of the LORD d proves true;
he is e a shield for all those who f take refuge in him.
31[†] For g who is God, but the LORD?
And who is h a rock, except our God?—
32 the God who i equipped me with strength
and made my way j blameless.
33 He made my feet like the feet of a k deer
and set me secure on l the heights.
34 He m trains my hands for war,
so that my arms can bend a bow of bronze.
35 You have given me the shield of your salvation,
and your right hand n supported me,
and your o gentleness made me great.
36 You p gave a wide place for my steps under me,
and my feet did not slip.
37 I pursued my enemies and overtook them,
and did not turn back till they were consumed.
38 I thrust them through, so that they were not able to rise;
they fell under my feet.
39 For you equipped me with strength for the battle;
you made those who rise against me sink under me.
40 You made my enemies q turn their backs to me, [5]
and those who hated me I destroyed.
41
r They cried for help, but there was none to save;
they cried to the LORD, but he did not answer them.
42 I beat them fine as s dust before the wind;
I cast them out like t the mire of the streets.
43 You delivered me from u strife with the people;
you made me v the head of the nations;
w people whom I had not known served me.
44 As soon as they heard of me they obeyed me;
x foreigners y came cringing to me.
45
x Foreigners lost heart
and z came trembling out of their fortresses.
46[†] The LORD lives, and blessed be my rock,
and exalted be the God of my salvation—
47 the God who gave me vengeance
and a subdued peoples under me,
48 who delivered me from my enemies;
yes, you b exalted me above those who rose against me;
you rescued me from c the man of violence.
49 d For this I will praise you, O LORD, among the nations,
and e sing to your name.
50[†] Great f salvation he brings to his king,
and shows steadfast love to his g anointed,
to h David and his offspring forever.
The Law of the LORD Is Perfect
To the choirmaster. A Psalm of David.