PSALM 33 [†] h Shout for joy in the LORD, O you righteous!
i Praise befits the upright.
2 Give thanks to the LORD with the j lyre;
make melody to him with j the harp of k ten strings!
3 Sing to him l a new song;
play skillfully on the strings, with loud shouts.
4[†] For the word of the LORD is upright,
and all his work is done in m faithfulness.
5 He n loves righteousness and justice;
o the earth is full of the steadfast love of the LORD.
6 By p the word of the LORD the heavens were made,
and by q the breath of his mouth all r their host.
7 He gathers the waters of the sea as s a heap;
he t puts the deeps in storehouses.
8 Let all the earth fear the LORD;
let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him!
9 For u he spoke, and it came to be;
he commanded, and it stood firm.
10[†] The LORD v brings the counsel of the nations to nothing;
he frustrates the plans of the peoples.
11
w The counsel of the LORD stands forever,
the plans of his heart to all generations.
12 x Blessed is the nation whose God is the LORD,
the people whom he has y chosen as his heritage!
13 The LORD z looks down from heaven;
he sees all the children of man;
14 from a where he sits enthroned he b looks out
on all the inhabitants of the earth,
15 he who fashions the hearts of them all
and observes all their deeds.
16
c The king is not saved by his great army;
a warrior is not delivered by his great strength.
17 d The war horse is a false hope for salvation,
and by its great might it cannot rescue.
18 Behold, e the eye of the LORD is on those who fear him,
f on those who hope in his steadfast love,
19 that he may g deliver their soul from death
and keep them alive in h famine.
20[†] Our soul i waits for the LORD;
he is our j help and k our shield.
21 For our heart is l glad in him,
because we m trust in his holy name.
22 Let your steadfast love, O LORD, be upon us,
even as we hope in you.
Taste and See That the LORD Is Good
[1] Of David, when he n changed his behavior before o Abimelech, so that he drove him out, and he
went away.