PSALM 107 [†] g Oh give thanks to the LORD, h for he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever!
2 Let i the redeemed of the LORD say so,
whom he has j redeemed from trouble [1]
3 and k gathered in from the lands,
from the east and from the west,
from the north and from the south.
4[†] Some l wandered in desert wastes,
finding no way m to a city to dwell in;
5 hungry and thirsty,
their soul n fainted within them.
6 Then they o cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he delivered them from their distress.
7 He led them by p a straight way
till they reached m a city to dwell in.
8 q Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wondrous works to the children of man!
9 For he r satisfies the longing soul,
s and the hungry soul he fills with good things.
10[†] t Some sat in darkness and in u the shadow of death,
prisoners in v affliction and in irons,
11 for they w had rebelled against the words of God,
and x spurned the counsel of the Most High.
12 So he bowed their hearts down with hard labor;
they fell down, y with none to help.
13 z Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he delivered them from their distress.
14 He brought them out of a darkness and the shadow of death,
and b burst their bonds apart.
15 c Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wondrous works to the children of man!
16 For he d shatters the doors of bronze
and cuts in two the bars of iron.
17[†] Some were e fools through their sinful ways,
and because of their iniquities suffered affliction;
18 f they loathed any kind of food,
and they g drew near to h the gates of death.
19 i Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he delivered them from their distress.
20 He j sent out his word and k healed them,
and l delivered them from their destruction.
21 m Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wondrous works to the children of man!
22 And let them n offer sacrifices of thanksgiving,
and o tell of his deeds in p songs of joy!
23[†] Some q went down to the sea in ships,
doing business on the great waters;
24 they saw the deeds of the LORD,
his wondrous works in the deep.
25 For he r commanded and s raised the stormy wind,
which lifted up the waves of the sea.
26 They mounted up to heaven; they went down to the depths;
their courage t melted away in their evil plight;
27 they reeled and u staggered like drunken men
and v were at their wits’ end. [2]
28
w Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and he delivered them from their distress.
29 He x made the storm be still,
and the waves of the sea were hushed.
30 Then they were glad that the waters [3] were quiet,
and he brought them to their desired haven.
31
y Let them thank the LORD for his steadfast love,
for his wondrous works to the children of man!
32 Let them z extol him in a the congregation of the people,
and praise him in the assembly of the elders.
33[†] He b turns rivers into a desert,
springs of water into thirsty ground,
34 c a fruitful land into a salty waste,
because of the evil of its inhabitants.
35 He d turns a desert into pools of water,
e a parched land into springs of water.
36 And there he lets the hungry dwell,
and they establish f a city to live in;
37 they sow fields and plant vineyards
and get a fruitful yield.
38 g By his blessing they multiply greatly,
and he does not let their livestock diminish.
39 When they are diminished and brought low
through oppression, evil, and sorrow,
40
h he pours contempt on princes
and i makes them wander j in trackless wastes;
41 but k he raises up the needy out of affliction
and l makes their families like flocks.
42 m The upright see it and are glad,
and n all wickedness shuts its mouth.
43[†] o Whoever is wise, let him attend to these things;
let them consider the steadfast love of the LORD.
With God We Shall Do Valiantly
A Song. A Psalm of David.