PSALM 102 [†] z Hear my prayer, O LORD;
let my cry a come to you!
2 b Do not hide your face from me
in c the day of my distress!
d Incline your ear to me;
e answer me speedily f in the day when I call!
3[†] For my days g pass away like smoke,
and my h bones burn like a furnace.
4 My heart is i struck down like grass and j has withered;
I k forget to eat my bread.
5 Because of my loud groaning
my l bones cling to my flesh.
6 I am like m a desert owl of the wilderness,
like an owl [1] of the waste places;
7 I n lie awake;
I am like a lonely sparrow on the housetop.
8 All the day my enemies taunt me;
those who o deride me p use my name for a curse.
9 For I eat ashes like bread
and q mingle tears with my drink,
10 because of your indignation and anger;
for you have r taken me up and s thrown me down.
11 My days are like t an evening shadow;
I j wither away like grass.
12[†] But you, O LORD, are u enthroned forever;
you v are remembered throughout all generations.
13 You will w arise and have x pity on Zion;
it is the time to favor her;
y the appointed time has come.
14 For your servants hold her z stones dear
and have pity on her dust.
15 Nations will a fear the name of the LORD,
and all b the kings of the earth will fear your glory.
16 For the LORD c builds up Zion;
he d appears in his glory;
17 he e regards the prayer of the destitute
and does not despise their prayer.
18[†] Let this be f recorded for g a generation to come,
so that h a people yet to be created may praise the LORD:
19 that he i looked down from his holy height;
from heaven the LORD looked at the earth,
20 to hear j the groans of the prisoners,
to set free k those who were doomed to die,
21 that they may l declare in Zion the name of the LORD,
and in Jerusalem his praise,
22 when m peoples gather together,
and kingdoms, to worship the LORD.
23[†] He has broken my strength in midcourse;
he n has shortened my days.
24 “O my God,” o I say, “take me not away
in the midst of my days—
p you whose years endure
throughout all generations!”
25[†] q Of old you laid the foundation of the earth,
and r the heavens are the work of your hands.
26 s They will perish, but t you will remain;
they will all wear out like a garment.
You will change them like a robe, and they will pass away,
27 but u you are the same, and your years have no end.
28[†] v The children of your servants w shall dwell secure;
x their offspring shall be established before you.
Bless the LORD, O My Soul
Of David.