REVELATION 12 [†]And a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman e clothed
with f the sun, with f the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of
twelve stars. 2She was pregnant and g was crying out in birth pains and the
agony of giving birth. 3[†]And another sign appeared in heaven: behold, a
great h red dragon, i with seven heads and j ten horns, and on his heads
k seven diadems. 4[†]His tail swept down l a third of the stars of heaven and
m cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was
about to give birth, so that when she bore her child n he might devour it.
5[†]She gave birth to a male child, o one who is to rule all the nations with a
rod of iron, but her child was p caught up to God and to his throne, 6[†]and
the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God,
in which she is to be nourished for q 1,260 days.
Satan Thrown Down to Earth
7[†]Now war arose in heaven, r Michael and s his angels fighting against
the dragon. And the dragon and his angels fought back, 8[†]but he was
defeated, and there was no longer any place for them in heaven. 9And t the
great dragon was thrown down, u that ancient serpent, who is called the
devil and Satan, v the deceiver of the whole world— w he was thrown down
to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him. 10And I heard a
loud voice in heaven, saying, “Now x the salvation and the power and the
kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ have come, for the
accuser of our brothers [1] has been thrown down, y who accuses them day
and night before our God. 11And z they have conquered him by the blood of
the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, for a they loved not their lives
b even unto death. 12[†]Therefore, c rejoice, O heavens and you who dwell
in them! But d woe to you, O earth and sea, for the devil has come down to
you in great wrath, because e he knows that his time is short!”
13And when the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the earth,
he pursued f the woman who had given birth to the male child. 14[†]But the
woman was given the two g wings of the great eagle so that she might fly
from the serpent h into the wilderness, to the place where she is to be
nourished i for a time, and times, and half a time. 15[†]The serpent poured
water j like a river out of his mouth after the woman, to sweep her away
with a flood. 16But the earth came to the help of the woman, and the earth
opened its mouth and swallowed the river that the dragon had poured from
his mouth. 17[†]Then the dragon became furious with the woman and went
off k to make war on the rest of l her offspring, m on those who keep the
commandments of God and hold to n the testimony of Jesus. And he
stood [2] on the sand of the sea.
The First Beast