REVELATION 14 [†]Then I looked, and behold, on v Mount Zion w stood the
Lamb, and with him x 144,000 who y had his name and his Father’s name
written z on their foreheads. 2And I heard a voice from heaven a like the
roar of many waters and b like the sound of loud thunder. The voice I heard
was like the sound of c harpists playing on their harps, 3[†]and they were
singing d a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures
and before the elders. e No one could learn that song except the 144,000
who had been redeemed from the earth. 4[†]It is these who have not defiled
themselves with women, for f they are virgins. It is these g who follow the
Lamb wherever he goes. These have been redeemed from mankind as
h firstfruits for God and the Lamb, 5and i in their mouth no lie was found,
for they are j blameless.
The Messages of the Three Angels
6Then I saw another angel k flying directly overhead, with an eternal gospel
to proclaim to l those who dwell on earth, to every nation and tribe and
language and people. 7And he said with a loud voice, m “Fear God and
n give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come, and o worship
him who made heaven and earth, the sea and the p springs of water.”
8[†]Another angel, a second, followed, saying, q “Fallen, fallen is
r Babylon the great, s she who made all nations drink t the wine of the
passion [1] of her sexual immorality.”
9[†]And another angel, a third, followed them, saying with a loud voice,
“If anyone u worships the beast and its image and receives v a mark on his
forehead or on his hand, 10he also will drink w the wine of God’s wrath,
x poured full strength into the cup of his anger, and y he will be tormented
with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of
the Lamb. 11And z the smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever, and
a they have no rest, day or night, these u worshipers of the beast and its
image, and whoever receives the mark of its name.”
12
b Here is a call for the endurance of the saints, those who c keep the
commandments of God and their faith in Jesus. [2]
13And I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Write this: d Blessed are the
dead e who die in the Lord from now on.” “Blessed indeed,” says the Spirit,
f “that they may rest from their labors, for their deeds follow them!”
The Harvest of the Earth
14[†]Then I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and seated on the cloud one
g like a son of man, h with a golden crown on his head, and a sharp sickle in
his hand. 15[†]And another angel i came out of the temple, calling with a
loud voice to him who sat on the cloud, j “Put in your sickle, and reap, for
the hour to reap has come, for k the harvest of the earth is fully ripe.” 16So
he who sat on the cloud swung his sickle across the earth, and the earth was
reaped.
17[†]Then another angel came out of the temple in heaven, and he too had
a sharp sickle. 18And another angel came out from the altar, l the angel who
has authority over the fire, and he called with a loud voice to the one who
had the sharp sickle, “Put in your sickle and gather the clusters from the
vine of the earth, m for its grapes are ripe.” 19So the angel swung his sickle
across the earth and gathered the grape harvest of the earth and threw it into
the great n winepress of the wrath of God. 20And o the winepress was
trodden p outside the city, and blood flowed from the winepress, as high as
q a horse’s bridle, for 1,600 stadia. [3]
The Seven Angels with Seven Plagues