REVELATION 2 [†]“To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: ‘The words
of e him who holds the seven stars in his right hand, f who walks among the
seven golden lampstands.
2 g “‘I know your works, your toil and your patient endurance, and how
you cannot bear with those who are evil, but h have tested those i who call
themselves apostles and are not, and found them to be false. 3I know you
are enduring patiently and bearing up j for my name’s sake, and you k have
not grown weary.
4[†]But I have this against you, that you have abandoned
l the love you had at first. 5Remember therefore from where you have
fallen; repent, and do m the works you did at first. If not, n I will come to
you and remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent. 6[†]Yet
this you have: you hate the works of o the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
7[†] p He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
q To the one who conquers I will grant to eat of r the tree of life, which is in
s the paradise of God.’
To the Church in Smyrna
8[†]“And to the angel of the church in Smyrna write: ‘The words of t the
first and the last, u who died and came to life.
9[†]“‘I know your tribulation and v your poverty ( v but you are rich) and
the slander [1] of w those who say that they are Jews and are not, but are a
synagogue of Satan. 10[†]Do not fear what you are about to suffer. Behold,
the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, w that you may be
tested, and for x ten days y you will have tribulation. z Be faithful a unto
death, and I will give you b the crown of life. 11
c He who has an ear, let him
hear what the Spirit says to the churches. c The one who conquers will not
be hurt by d the second death.’
To the Church in Pergamum
12[†]“And to the angel of the church in Pergamum write: ‘The words of him
who has e the sharp two-edged sword.
13[†]“‘I know where you dwell, f where Satan’s throne is. Yet you hold
fast my name, and you did not g deny my faith [2] even in the days of
Antipas h my faithful witness, who was killed among you, where Satan
dwells. 14[†]But I have a few things against you: you have some there who
hold the teaching of i Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block
before the sons of Israel, so that they might j eat food sacrificed to idols and
k practice sexual immorality.
15So also you have some who hold the
teaching of l the Nicolaitans. 16[†]Therefore repent. If not, m I will come to
you soon and n war against them with e the sword of my mouth. 17[†] c He
who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. c To the
one who conquers I will give some of o the hidden manna, and I will give
him a white stone, with p a new name written on the stone q that no one
knows except the one who receives it.’
To the Church in Thyatira
18[†]“And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: ‘The words of the
Son of God, r who has eyes like a flame of fire, and whose feet are like
burnished bronze.
19[†] s “‘I know your works, your love and faith and service and patient
endurance, and that your latter works exceed the first. 20But I have this
against you, that you tolerate that woman t Jezebel, who calls herself a
prophetess and is teaching and seducing my servants [3] u to practice sexual
immorality and u to eat food sacrificed to idols. 21[†]I gave her time to
repent, but v she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality.
22Behold, I will
throw her onto a sickbed, and those who commit adultery with her I will
throw into great tribulation, unless they repent of her works, 23and I will
strike her children dead. And all the churches will know that I am he w who
searches mind and heart, and x I will give to each of you according to your
works. 24[†]But to the rest of you in Thyatira, who do not hold this
teaching, who have not learned what some call y the deep things of Satan, to
you I say, I z do not lay on you any other burden. 25Only hold fast a what
you have until I come. 26[†] b The one who conquers and who keeps my
works c until the end, d to him I will give authority over the nations, 27and
e he will f rule them with a rod of iron, g as when earthen pots are broken in
pieces, even as I myself have received authority from my Father.
28And I
will give him h the morning star.
29
p He who has an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit says to the churches.’
To the Church in Sardis