ROMANS 4 [†]What then shall we say was gained by [1] Abraham, t our
forefather according to the flesh? 2For if Abraham was justified by works,
he has something to boast about, but u not before God. 3[†]For what does
the Scripture say? v “Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as
righteousness.” 4Now w to the one who works, his wages are not counted as
a gift but as his due. 5And to the one who does not work but x believes in [2]
him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted as righteousness, 6[†]just
as David also speaks of the blessing of the one to whom God counts
righteousness apart from works:
7 y “Blessed are those whose lawless deeds are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered;
8 blessed is the man against whom the Lord will not z count his sin.”
9Is this blessing then only for a the circumcised, or also for the
uncircumcised? b For we say that faith was counted to Abraham as
righteousness. 10How then was it counted to him? Was it before or after he
had been circumcised? It was not after, but before he was circumcised.
11[†] c He received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness
that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised. The purpose was d to
make him the father of all who believe without being circumcised, so that
righteousness would be counted to them as well, 12and to make him the
father of the circumcised who are not merely circumcised but who also
walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had before he was
circumcised.
The Promise Realized Through Faith
13[†]For e the promise to Abraham and his offspring f that he would be heir
of the world did not come through the law but through the righteousness of
faith. 14 g For if it is the adherents of the law who are to be the heirs, faith is
null and the promise is void. 15[†]For h the law brings wrath, but i where
there is no law j there is no transgression.
16[†]That is why it depends on faith, k in order that the promise may rest
on grace and l be guaranteed to all his offspring—not only to the adherent
of the law but also to the one who shares the faith of Abraham, m who is the
father of us all, 17[†]as it is written, n “I have made you the father of many
nations”—in the presence of the God in whom he believed, o who gives life
to the dead and calls into existence p the things that do not exist. 18In hope
he believed against hope, that he should become the father of many nations,
as he had been told, q “So shall your offspring be.” 19He did not weaken in
faith when he considered his own body, which was r as good as dead
( s since he was about a hundred years old), or when he considered t the
barrenness [3] of Sarah’s womb. 20No unbelief made him waver concerning
the promise of God, but he grew strong in his faith as he gave glory to God,
21fully convinced that u God was able to do what he had promised. 22That is
why his faith was “counted to him as righteousness.” 23[†]But v the words
“it was counted to him” were not written for his sake alone, 24but for ours
also. It will be counted to us w who believe in x him who raised from the
dead Jesus our Lord, 25[†] y who was delivered up for our trespasses and
raised z for our justification.
Peace with God Through Faith