ROMANS 16 [†]I commend to you our sister Phoebe, a servant [1] of the
church at p Cenchreae, 2[†]that you q may welcome her in the Lord in a way
worthy of the saints, and help her in whatever she may need from you, for
she has been a patron of many and of myself as well.
3[†]Greet r Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
4[†]who risked their necks for my life, to whom not only I give thanks but
all the churches of the Gentiles give thanks as well. 5[†]Greet also s the
church in their house. Greet my beloved Epaenetus, who was t the first
convert [2] to Christ in Asia. 6Greet Mary, who has worked hard for you.
7[†]Greet Andronicus and Junia, [3] my kinsmen and my u fellow prisoners.
They are well known to the apostles, [4] and they were in Christ before me.
8[†]Greet Ampliatus, my beloved in the Lord. 9Greet Urbanus, our fellow
worker in Christ, and my beloved Stachys. 10Greet Apelles, who is
approved in Christ. Greet those v who belong to the family of Aristobulus.
11[†]Greet my kinsman Herodion. Greet those in the Lord who belong to the
family of Narcissus. 12Greet those workers in the Lord, Tryphaena and
Tryphosa. Greet the beloved Persis, who has worked hard in the Lord.
13[†]Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord; also his mother, who has been a
mother to me as well. 14Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas,
Hermas, and the brothers [5] who are with them. 15Greet Philologus, Julia,
Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.
16[†] w Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet
you.
Final Instructions and Greetings
17I appeal to you, brothers, to watch out for those who cause divisions and
create obstacles x contrary to the doctrine that you have been taught; y avoid
them. 18For such persons do not serve our Lord Christ, but z their own
appetites, [6] and a by smooth talk and flattery they deceive the hearts of the
naive. 19For b your obedience is known to all, so that I rejoice over you, but
I want you c to be wise as to what is good and innocent as to what is evil.
20[†] d The God of peace e will soon crush Satan under your feet. f The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
21[†] g Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you; so do Lucius and Jason
and Sosipater, my kinsmen.
22[†]I Tertius, h who wrote this letter, greet you in the Lord.
23[†] i Gaius, who is host to me and to the whole church, greets you.
Erastus, the city treasurer, and our brother Quartus, greet you. [7]
Doxology
25[†] j Now to him who is able to strengthen you k according to my gospel
and the preaching of Jesus Christ, l according to the revelation of the
mystery m that was kept secret for n long ages 26[†]but o has now been
disclosed and through the prophetic writings has been made known to all
nations, according to the command of the eternal God, p to bring about the
obedience of faith— 27[†]to q the only wise God r be glory forevermore
through Jesus Christ! Amen.
Study Notes for Romans
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:1–17 The Gospel as the Revelation of God’ s Righteous-
ness. This first section includes Paul’s opening greeting (vv. 1–7),
thanksgiving (vv. 8–15), and statement of the letter’s overall theme (vv. 16–
17).
FACT
A letter to Rome. Because Romans is Paul’s fullest explanation of his
theology, it is easy to forget that Paul wrote it to a particular church in Rome.
His letter applies the eternal truth of the gospel to their real-life concerns, but
the letter applies today to people all around the globe, from all different
kinds of backgrounds, because it is dealing with fundamental truths.
FACT
God’s judgment. Global humanity’s rejection of God is the root of all that is
wrong with the world. Since Adam and Eve, everyone has responded to
God’s love by doing things he hates. Everyone deserves punishment, but
God offers forgiveness through Christ (see 3:23–24).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:1–7 This is the longest introduction of any of Paul’s
letters. He has never been to Rome, so he summarizes the gospel for his Roman
readers. Many of the things he mentions here are also in the final verses of his
letter (16:25–27): (1) Paul’s apostolic authority; (2) how the gospel fulfills OT
Scriptures; (3) how the gospel centers on Jesus Christ; (4) the obedience of
faith; (5) Paul’s mission to the Gentiles; and (6) the glory of Jesus Christ and
God the Father.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:1 Servant indicates that Paul is a “bondservant” of Christ
(see note on 1 Cor. 7:21; and Preface). It also recalls the honored servants of
God in the OT, such as Moses, Joshua, David, and the prophets. apostle. Paul’s
authority is equal to that of the 11 original apostles chosen by Christ (Matt.
10:1–7; Acts 1:24–26; Gal. 1:1), who had seen him after his resurrection (Acts
1:22; 1 Cor. 9:1; 15:7–9). They established and governed the whole church,
under Christ’s authority. They had authority to speak and write the words of
God, and what they wrote was equal in authority to the OT Scriptures (1 Cor.
14:37; 1 Thess. 2:13). Paul was called to be an apostle when Jesus appeared to
him on the Damascus road (Acts 9; 22; 26). Gospel means “good news.” This
includes the call to saving faith and the message of how Jesus transforms all of
life and all of history.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:2–3 Jesus fulfilled the OT prophecy that a descendant of
David would rule forever. He is the Messiah (see 2 Sam. 7:12–16; Psalm 132;
Isa. 11:1–5).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:4 As the eternal Son of God, Jesus has reigned forever
with the Father and the Holy Spirit. “Son of God” was a Jewish title for the
Messiah. Christ’s reign as Messiah began when he was raised from the dead
according to the Spirit of holiness (through the Holy Spirit).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:5 Paul’s mission is to all humanity. His goal is to bring
about the obedience of faith (see 16:26). Saving faith results in obedience.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:7 loved by God and called. God shows his love by
calling his people to himself. All believers are God’s saints, his “holy ones.”
Grace means God’s unmerited favor. Peace is not just the absence of conflict.
It echoes the OT concept of blessing, in which the person and community are
well and whole in all aspects of life.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:8 thank. Paul typically follows the greeting in his letters
with a thanksgiving (compare 1 Cor. 1:1–9; Phil. 1:1–8). He is thankful
because the kingdom of God is advancing throughout all the world. It is no
longer confined to the Jews but has also spread to the Gentiles.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:13 Paul neither “planted” nor “watered” the church at
Rome (see 1 Cor. 3:6), but he still rejoices in the harvest of their increased
maturity and obedience.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:14 Paul was under an obligation to Jesus Christ, who
appointed him to be the apostle to the Gentiles. Greeks. Those who spoke
Greek and adopted Greek culture in the Greco-Roman world. barbarians.
Those outside of Greek culture.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:15 preach the gospel to you also. The gospel is not just
the initial call to saving faith. It is also the call to keep on walking by faith (6:4;
8:4; 2 Cor. 5:17).
Rome in the Time of Paul (c. A.D. 60)
The city plan below shows most of the features of the city of Rome that archaeologists have so far
identified as dating from the time of Paul. Sections of the city would have been very impressive in his
time, but most of the outstanding buildings visible in Rome today date to after his death.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:16 Jew first. The Jews have priority in salvation history
because they are God’s chosen people. See chs. 9–11. Greek refers here to all
Gentiles.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:17 The righteousness of God most likely means
“righteousness from God.” It reflects a right standing before God that is given
to people by God (see Phil. 3:9). The phrase likely has this meaning in Rom.
3:21–22 and 2 Cor. 5:21 as well (see notes on those verses). However, the
expression probably also refers to God’s righteous moral character. This is seen
in his holiness and justice. It is also seen in the way that his act of saving
sinners through Christ’s death meets the just demand of his holy nature. From
faith for faith probably means that right standing with God is by faith from
start to finish. shall live by faith. People receive the gift of salvation by faith.
It is also by faith that they live each day. See Hab. 2:4.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:18–3:20 God’ s Righteousness in His Wrath against
Sinners. God’s wrath is rightly revealed against all people, since all have
sinned (3:23). Paul describes the sinfulness of the Gentiles (1:18–32), and the
Jews (2:1–3:8), and of all people, Jew and Gentile alike (3:9–20).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:18 The wrath of God refers to his personal anger against
sin. God’s anger is his holy response to rejection of his love and law.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:19–20 things that have been made. The entire natural
world reveals God through its beauty, complexity, design, and usefulness.
without excuse. God has given sufficient evidence of his existence and
character.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:21 they knew God. All people know God exists. They
also know a lot about him, even if they do not have a saving knowledge of him.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:22 Even brilliant people who do not honor God miss the
whole purpose of life and are therefore fools (see Prov. 1:7).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:23 Idolatry is the most basic sin. In addition to the images
housed in great temples, Roman families commonly kept images of “house
gods” in their homes. People today still devote their lives to, and trust in, many
things other than God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:24 Three times Paul says God gave them up to sin (vv.
24, 26, 28). Each time the “giving up” is a reaction to idolatry. The idol
worshiper refuses to recognize that God our Maker is the center of all
existence. He worships the “creature” rather than the “Creator” (v. 25).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:25 exchanged the truth about God for a lie. All non-
Christian religions are based on false ideas about God. They are not just
“different paths” to God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:26–27 Not only homosexual acts but also homosexual
passions or desires are dishonorable before God. Just as idolatry is unnatural
(contrary to what God intended), so too homosexuality is contrary to nature.
God made men and women with physical bodies that have a “natural” way of
interacting with each other. Men . . . with men includes all homosexual
relationships, not just those generally considered abusive. Due penalty could
refer to the sin of homosexuality itself. Or, the “and” in and receiving may
indicate some additional negative consequences received in themselves, that
is, some form of spiritual, emotional, or physical disorder.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 1:32 People do not generally sin in innocent ignorance.
They know God’s righteous decree (at least in an instinctive way) that their
evildoing deserves punishment.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:1–29 Most interpreters say that Paul focuses on the sin of
the Jews throughout this chapter. Another view is that the sin of the moral
person (whether Jewish or Gentile) who judges others is condemned in vv. 1–
16, while Jews alone are condemned in vv. 17–29.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:4 Do you presume is probably addressed to Jews who
thought that their covenant relationship with God would save them from final
judgment. They thought that his kindness and forbearance and patience
showed that they were right with him and had no need for Christ. Paul says
God’s blessings should have led them to repent of their sins.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:5 A soft and repentant heart is needed to avoid God’s
wrath on the day of wrath, the final judgment. Such repentance leads a person
to trust in Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins. Unfortunately, most people
are storing up wrath for themselves on that final day.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:6–11 Paul establishes the principle that God judges
according to . . . works. In doing so, he shows no partiality.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:12 All will be judged according to the standard they had.
Gentiles will perish (face final judgment) because of their sin (see vv. 14–15)
even though they are without the law (the written laws of the OT). Jews, who
possess the law, will be judged for their transgressions against it.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:14–16 For Gentiles, God’s law is written on their
hearts. Their consciences show what is right or wrong in their behavior. Paul
does not imply that the human conscience is always a perfect moral guide (see
1 Cor. 8:7, 10; 10:29). But its existence is enough to make people accountable
to God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:16 my gospel. Not Paul’s alone, but the gospel that he
preaches.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:21–24 The Jews fail to practice the law they proclaim.
Thus they will face judgment.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:22 rob temples. Robbing temples was a common crime
in the ancient world because temples contained expensive items that could be
sold for profit.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:24 Because they violated the law, the Jews were exiled by
God. Their military and political defeats dishonored God because they were
known as his people. Although the Jews did not face exile in Paul’s day, their
sins still led Gentiles to dishonor the God they claimed to follow.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:25–26 The Jews tended to believe that they would be
spared at the last judgment because of their circumcision (Gen. 17:9–14; Lev.
12:3). uncircumcision. Paul argues, however, that Jews who violate the law
are considered by God to be uncircumcised. They are outside the covenant and
headed for judgment. Circumcision would be of value for salvation if the
circumcised would obey the law perfectly, but no one can do that. Paul takes
up the issue of circumcision again in Rom. 4:9–16.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:27 The written code refers to OT laws.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 2:28–29 In striking contrast to Jewish beliefs of his day,
Paul claims that true Jewishness and genuine circumcision are not ethnic or
physical matters. Rather, they are matters of the heart. They are the work of
the Holy Spirit. This letter/Spirit contrast compares the old era of redemptive
history with the new age begun by Jesus Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:1 Now Paul raises the logical question of whether there is
any advantage or value in being an ethnic Jew and being physically
circumcised. He probably means “value for salvation.”
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:2 One might expect Paul to answer that there is no
advantage in being a Jew (see v. 1). Instead, he claims that the Jews have great
advantages, mainly in possessing the oracles of God, which refers to the OT
Scriptures. On the Jews being entrusted with the oracles of God, see Deut.
4:8; 5:22–27; Ps. 147:20.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:3–4 Even though most Jews were unfaithful and refused
to trust and obey God, he remains faithful to them. God will fulfill his covenant
promises, particularly his promise to save them. Paul does not mean that every
single Jew will be saved, though. He discusses God’s faithfulness to the Jews
more fully in chs. 9–11.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:5–8 Some of Paul’s Jewish opponents claimed that he
taught a doctrine of “cheap grace,” that is, that God receives more glory when
Christians do evil and then are forgiven. Paul emphatically denies this but
waits until ch. 6 to discuss this charge in more detail.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:9 Greeks. The entire Gentile world in contrast to the
Jews.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:10–12 Paul focuses on the sinfulness of every human
being, citing Ps. 14:1–3 and perhaps thinking of Eccles. 7:20. no one does
good. Human beings do some things that seem to be good. But these actions,
prior to salvation, are still stained by evil because they are not done for God’s
glory (Rom. 1:21) and do not come from faith (14:23).
OT Testimony that All Are under Sin (3:9)
Romans 3 OT Reference
Sinful Condition
v. 10, none is righteous v. 11a, no one understands v. 11b, no one seeks for God Ps. 14:3/53:3; Eccles. 7:20
Ps. 14:2/53:2
Ps. 14:2/53:2
v. 12, all have turned aside; together they have become worthless; no one does good, not even one Ps. 14:3/53:3
Sinful Speech (note progression from throat to tongue to lips)
v. 13a, b, their throat is an open grave; they use their tongues to deceive v. 13c, the venom of asps is under their lips v. 14, their mouth is full of curses and bitterness Ps. 5:10, Septuagint (English, 5:9)
Ps. 140:3
Ps. 10:7
Sinful Action
v. 15, their feet are swift to shed blood v. 16, in their paths are ruin and misery v. 17, and the way of peace they have not known Prov. 1:16/Isa. 59:7
Isa. 59:7
Isa. 59:8
Summary Statement
v. 18, there is no fear of God before their eyes Ps. 36:1
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:13–14 Paul quotes from Ps. 5:9 and 10:7. The reference
to the grave highlights either the corruption of the heart or the deadly effects of
sin.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:15–17 Paul draws from Isa. 59:7–8 to show how human
history includes murder, war, and disorder.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:18 The root cause of sin is failure to fear and honor God
(Ps. 36:1).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:19–20 These verses represent the conclusion of vv. 9–18
and all of 1:18–3:20. All humans, without exception, are sinners.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:19 law. The Mosaic law.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:20 Works of the law means all that the law requires.
Justified is a legal term meaning “declared righteous” (see note on Gal. 2:16).
FACT
What does it mean to be “justified”? To be justified means to be declared
righteous before God. It means that, as the divine judge, God looks on those
who are in Jesus and declares them “guilty as charged, but pardoned and
accepted.”
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:21–4:25 The Saving Righteousness of God. Paul now
explains that people can have a right standing with God only through faith in
the atoning work of Jesus on the cross.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:21 The righteousness of God has been shown now, in the
period of salvation history that began with Jesus’ death and resurrection. On
the righteousness of God, see note on 1:17. By God’s saving acts in Christ,
humans may stand in the right before God, the divine judge. apart from the
law. Righteousness is not based on obeying the law. Yet the Law and the
Prophets bear witness to it. The OT Scriptures looked forward to salvation
through Christ (see 1:2).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:24 The word redemption recalls the exodus and the
blood of the Passover lamb (see Exodus 12–15; Eph. 1:7; Col. 1:14). On
justification, see note on Gal. 2:16.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:25 Jesus’ blood “propitiated” or satisfied God’s wrath
(1:18). Thus he could forgive sinners while also maintaining his holiness. Some
scholars argue that the word propitiation should be translated expiation (the
wiping away of sin), but the word refers to the satisfaction of God’s wrath,
turning it from wrath to favor. God’s righteous anger needed to be satisfied
before sin could be forgiven. God in his love sent his Son to meet the demands
of God’s holy anger against sin. God’s justice was questioned because he had
patiently overlooked former sins. But Paul says that God knew Christ’s death
would happen, where the full payment for the guilt of sin would be made.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:26 In the cross of Christ, God has shown himself to be
just (utterly holy, so that the penalty demanded by the law is not removed but
is paid by Christ). He is also the justifier of all those who trust in Jesus. That
is, he provides the means of justification and declares people to be in right
standing with himself. Here is the heart of the Christian faith, for at the cross
God’s justice and love meet.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:27 The word law in this verse probably means principle,
though some think it refers to the OT law.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:28 Justification is by faith alone, apart from . . . the
law. It does not depend at all on doing any works of the law.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:29–30 Since God is the Lord of all, whether Jews or
Gentiles, there can be only one way of justification—by faith.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 3:31 Although Paul supports the lasting moral teachings of
the law (uphold), he knows that some will accuse him of abandoning it
(overthrow). He will defend himself against such charges in chs. 6–7.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:1–25 Abraham, the father of the Jewish people, is
presented as a test case for the view that justification is by faith alone.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:3 Abraham had a right standing before God by believing,
not by doing (Gen. 15:6).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:6–8 Paul introduces David as a second example of
righteousness by faith, citing Ps. 32:1–2.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:11 sign . . . seal. Circumcision proved the righteousness
by faith that Abraham had before his circumcision.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:13–14 The world to come is another term for the final
salvation that will be given to Abraham and all believers (see Heb. 11:10–16;
Revelation 21–22). If the inheritance is gained by observing the law, then
righteousness is no longer by faith but by works.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:15 transgression. The violation of a revealed command.
The Jews, who had the written law, had even greater responsibility for their sin.
Paul argues elsewhere that sin also exists where no written law is involved; see
2:12, and note on 5:13.
FACT
Transgression means to disobey a specific command from God. It could
refer to a violation of a command in the written law of God (4:15) or to a
verbal command from God, as in the case of Adam (5:14).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:16 Faith means trusting in another, not in one’s own
efforts. It corresponds exactly to grace, which involves trusting God’s gift of
unearned favor. The adherent of the law refers to the Jewish believer in
Christ. father of us all. Abraham is the father of all believers, whether Jew or
Gentile.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:17 many nations. Genesis 17:5 confirms Abraham’s
universal fatherhood. calls into existence the things that do not exist. If God
created the world out of nothing, he could certainly give Sarah a child.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:23–24 but for ours also. In God’s plan, Scriptures as far
back as Gen. 15:6 apply also to Christians in the new covenant age.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 4:25 raised for our justification. Both the death and the
resurrection of Jesus Christ are necessary for forgiveness of sins and
justification. When God raised Christ from the dead, it showed that he accepted
Christ’s suffering and death as full payment for sin. At the cross, God had
directed his wrath against Christ, but now, in the resurrection, God showed his
favor to Christ and to all who would believe in him. This can be true because
all who believe in Christ are united with him (see 6:6, 8–11; Eph. 2:6; Col.
2:12; 3:1).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:1–8:39 Hope as a Result of Righteousness by Faith.
Believers in Christ, who are righteous in God’s sight, have a sure hope of
future glory and life eternal.
FACT
Those who trust in Christ have peace with God (5:1). God declares them
forgiven. They stand securely in God’s grace and salvation rather than his
judgment (5:2, 8–9).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:1 Through faith in Christ, Christians have been justified
and declared righteous by God once for all. They no longer need to live in fear
of God’s wrath and judgment. Rather, they enjoy peace with God. See also
note on John 14:27.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:2 grace in which we stand. The believers’ secure
position as a result of their justification. hope of the glory of God. The
promise that Christians will be glorified and perfected at the last day.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:5 hope does not put us to shame. Followers of Christ
have no reason to fear humiliation on the judgment day, for they now belong to
God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:6 In this and the following verses, Paul shows how the
believer’s subjective experience of God’s love (v. 5) is firmly based on the
objective work of Christ on the cross. Weak here refers to lack of moral
strength and is another way to describe those who are ungodly.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:9 Christians are justified (declared right before God)
because of Christ’s blood poured out at the cross. Therefore, they can know
that they will be saved from God’s wrath on the day of judgment.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:10 As in v. 9, Paul argues from the greater to the lesser.
Since Christians are now reconciled to God through Christ’s death, they can be
assured that they will be saved on the day to come. Here “saved” includes
initial justification, completed sanctification, glorification, and future rewards.
Salvation is based on his life, that is, Christ’s resurrection (see 4:25; 6:1–23).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:12–21 Adam brought sin and death into the world, but
those who have believed in Christ have hope. Christ has reversed the
consequences of Adam’s sin and has given his own life and righteousness to
secure their eternal glory. The extended comparison between Adam and Christ
shows that Paul considered Adam a historical person.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:12 Sin came into the world through one man, namely,
Adam (v. 14; see Gen. 3:17–19; 1 Cor. 15:21–22). and death through sin.
Death is “the last enemy” (1 Cor. 15:26; see 15:54) and will be conquered
forever at Christ’s return (Rev. 21:4). “Death” in these verses most likely
includes both physical and spiritual death. Paul often connects the two. And so
death spread to all men probably means “and in this way death spread to all
men.” Because all sinned probably means that all people participated in
Adam’s sin because he represented all who would descend from him (just as
Christ’s obedience counts for all his followers; Rom. 5:15–19). Another
interpretation is that all people have sinned individually as a result of being
born into the world spiritually dead. The word translated “men” can mean
either males or people of both sexes, depending on the context. It is translated
“men” here (and in v. 18) to show the connection with “man,” referring to
Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:13 sin is not counted where there is no law. Paul does
not mean that people are guiltless without the law (see 2:12). Those without the
written law are still judged by God (see Genesis 6–9; 11:1–9).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:14 Those who did not live under the law were still judged
for their sin, and therefore they died. Still, their sinning was not like the
transgression of Adam: Adam violated a commandment specifically given to
him by God. Adam is a type (that is, a model or pattern) of Christ. Both Adam
and Christ are covenantal heads of the human race. All people are either “in
Adam” or “in Christ” (see 1 Cor. 15:22). All are “in Adam” by physical birth,
while only those who have placed their faith in Christ are “in” him.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:15 Paul contrasts the consequences of the work of Adam
and of Christ five times in the next five verses. This shows their roles as
covenantal heads of the people they represent. Paul clearly teaches “original
sin,” the fact that all people inherit a sinful nature because of Adam’s sin. Paul
probably is also teaching that all people are in fact guilty before God because
of Adam’s sin. Many (that is, all human beings excluding Christ) died. Death
begins with spiritual separation from God and ends in physical death.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:16 The one trespass of Adam resulted in the
condemnation of all. But Christ overcame sin, therefore all who belong to him
enjoy justification.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:17 Death ruled the human race due to Adam’s sin, but
Christians now stand in eternal life as rulers because of Christ’s work.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:18 for all men. Based on these verses, some interpreters
have argued that all people will be saved. But Paul makes it plain that only
those who “receive” God’s gift belong to Christ (v. 17; see also 1:16–5:11).
The wording “as . . . so” shows that Paul’s focus is not on how many will be
saved but on the method of either sin or righteousness being passed from the
representative leader to the whole group. men. See note on 5:12.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:19 Because of Adam’s disobedience, all people were
made (caused to be) sinners. When Adam (mankind’s representative) sinned,
God viewed the whole human race as guilty sinners. All are born with a sinful
nature because of Adam’s sin.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 5:20 The typical Jewish view in Paul’s day was that God
gave the law in order to reduce the human impulse to sin. But Paul claims that
the law was given to increase the trespass. That is, once people had written
laws from God, they were not just committing “sins” against God’s law as it
was ingrained in their conscience (see note on 2:14–16); rather, they were
willfully “trespassing” against his written word. Amid this increasing sin,
however, the grace revealed through Christ abounded all the more.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:1–23 The law does not and cannot conquer sin, but the
grace given to followers of Christ triumphs over sin and death.
FACT
Paul was probably asked, “Does your message about salvation by grace lead
people to continue in sin?” He explains what baptism symbolizes in the
Christian life: Christ’s defeat of sin’s rule and the gift of new life (6:1–14).
God changes believers so that they can obey him “from the heart” (6:17).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:1 Paul is likely responding to a question posed regularly
by his Jewish opponents. They argued that his gospel led people to continue in
sin.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:3 Christians died to sin when they were baptized into
Christ. Paul is not arguing that baptism destroys the power of sin. Baptism is
an outward, physical symbol of the inward, spiritual conversion of Christians.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:4 In the early church, baptism was probably by
immersion. Baptism pictures being buried with Christ (going under the water)
and being raised to new life with Christ (coming up from the water). This
symbolizes union with, and incorporation into, Christ by the action of the Holy
Spirit. Believers now have the power to live in newness of life.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:6 The power of sin has been broken in those who believe.
Their old self (literally, “old man,” meaning who they were in Adam) was
crucified and put to death with Christ. Body of sin refers to the ruling power
of sin that people willingly accept. Paul does not argue that Christians do not
sin at all, but he does say that they are no longer enslaved to sin. The normal
pattern of life for Christians should be progressive growth in maturity and
obedience to God’s moral law.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:7 One who has died means one who has died with
Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:10 died to sin. Jesus died because he took sin upon
himself. His resurrection demonstrates that he has defeated both sin and death.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:11 dead to sin. Dead to the continual love for and ruling
power of sin (see note on v. 6).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:12–13 Tension occurs here between what God has already
accomplished and his people’s responsibility to obey. They are still tempted by
desires to sin and must not let those desires gain control.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:14 sin will have no dominion over you. This is not a
command but a promise that sin will not defeat Christians. under grace. The
new covenant in Christ (see 3:24; 4:16; 5:2, 15–21).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:16 Giving in to sin leads to becoming obedient slaves to
sin. This eventually leads to death. This does not mean that genuine believers
can lose their salvation. It means that sinning leads them away from full
enjoyment of life with Christ. However, people who do give themselves utterly
to sin will die, that is, they will face eternal punishment (see notes on Heb. 6:4–
8).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:20–21 Both physical and spiritual death are probably
meant here.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 6:23 Wages implies that the punishment for sin is what one
has earned and deserves. Free gift is the opposite of something one deserves.
This fits Paul’s earlier emphasis on justification by grace alone (God’s
unmerited favor; see note on 4:16), through faith alone (trusting in Christ for
justification; see 1:17; 3:21–4:25).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:1–3 In this entire chapter, law refers to the Mosaic law
given at Mount Sinai. Those who know the law includes both Jews and
Gentiles who are familiar with the OT. Verse 1 introduces the principle that the
law applies only to living people. In vv. 2–3, Paul applies that principle to
marriage.
FACT
Even Christians often struggle with sinful desires (7:7–25), but they can be
confident that the Spirit lives within them, helping them to obey God (8:1–
11).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:4 Whereas the husband dies in the illustration in vv. 2–3,
here believers die to the law through the death of Christ. The comparison does
not match perfectly, but the application is clear.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:5 Flesh here stands for the old “Adam”—the unbelieving
former life of those who now believe. The law led to spiritual and physical
death (see 6:23) because rebellious people broke it and suffered the
consequences.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:6 But now represents the new era of redemptive history.
Christians now enjoy new life in the Spirit.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:7–25 The claim that the Mosaic law produced sin and
death raises the question, Is the law itself sinful? Paul explains that the law
itself is good and that the fault lies with sin. The “I” in these verses seems to be
Paul himself (see note on vv. 13–25).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:7 The law defines sin. People ignore God’s commands in
order to indulge their independence. This principle is illustrated from the tenth
commandment (Ex. 20:17).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:8 The prohibition against coveting increased the desire
for what was forbidden. Without such prohibitions, sin lies dead—it is still
present, but not in a powerful way.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:13–25 Even if the law is not sin (vv. 7–12), is the good
law responsible for death? Paul argues that the fault lies with sin, not with the
law. Through the law, sin is revealed in all its horror, while the law is shown to
be good. There has been much debate as to whether Paul is describing believers
or unbelievers. Although good arguments are given by both sides, the most
widely held view is that Paul is referring to believers. Advocates of both
positions agree that Christians struggle with sin their whole lives (see Gal.
5:17; 1 John 1:8–9). They also agree that Christians can and should grow in
sanctification throughout their lives by the power of the Holy Spirit (Rom. 8:2,
4, 9, 13–14). Those who think Paul is describing believers usually see this
passage as describing both Paul’s own experience and the experience of
Christians generally. This view is that Christians are free from the
condemnation of the law, but sin continues to dwell within them. They should
understand how far they fall short of God’s absolute standard of righteousness.
Thus Paul cries out, “Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this
body of death?” (7:24). The answer follows immediately: the one who has
delivered Christians once for all (see 4:2–25; 5:2, 9) and who will deliver them
day by day is “Jesus Christ our Lord!” (7:25). This reflects the ongoing tension
between the “already” aspect of salvation (believers have been saved) and the
“not yet” aspect (believers will be saved at the return of Christ).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:17 Paul emphasizes the power of sin.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:21–23 The meaning of “law” in these verses has been
debated. Some think every use of the word refers to the Mosaic law. Most
argue that in vv. 21 and 23 the term means “principle.” All agree that the
Mosaic law is in view in v. 22. The Greek word used here can have either
meaning.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 7:24–25 Who will deliver me? The living presence of
Jesus Christ is the answer to the problem of sin.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:1–17 Paul celebrates the new life of the Spirit that
Christians enjoy as a result of Christ’s saving work.
The Trinity in Romans 8
This chart focuses on statements that have Father, Son, or Spirit as the subject.
For additional references to Father, Son, or Spirit in Romans 8, see vv. 1–2, 4–
7, 13, 15, 17–23, 28.
Father Son Spirit
sent his Son (v. 3)
condemned sin (v. 3)
gives life to mortal bodies of believers by his
Spirit in them (v. 11) in believers (v. 10) foreknew, predestined, called, justified,
died, raised, interceding at the right hand of the
glorified (vv. 29–30)
Father for believers (v. 34) is for us (v. 31) gave his Son (v. 32) justifies (v. 33)
loves (v. 39) loves (vv. 35, 39)
indwells believers (v. 9)
leads believers (v. 14)
bears witness with the spirit of
believers (v. 16)
helps in weakness and intercedes for
believers (vv. 26–27)
FACT
When Christ returns, he will fix everything that is broken and hurting (8:16–
39; see Rev. 21:1–22:5). He will restore creation, including every corner of
the globe, to its original beauty and wholeness. God will bring dead
believers back to life and make all his children perfect like Christ (Rom.
8:29; 1 Thess. 4:13–18).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:1 therefore. Paul summarizes and concludes his
preceding argument (see especially 7:23–25 and 3:21–5:21). Now matches the
“now” in 7:6. Christ began a new era of redemptive history for those who are
“now” in right standing before God because of Christ. No condemnation
echoes 5:1 (“Therefore . . . we have peace with God”). There is “no
condemnation” for the Christian because Jesus has paid the penalty for sin
through his death on the cross (8:2–3).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:2 Sin has no dominant power in believers’ lives. This
work of the Holy Spirit is evidence that believers are in Christ. Law in both
instances means “principle.”
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:3 The law (here, the Mosaic law) could not solve
humanity’s problem because sin uses the law for its own purposes (see ch. 7).
God sent his Son as a sacrifice for sin (a sin offering). Jesus paid the full
penalty for sin by his sacrifice (condemned sin). in the likeness of sinful
flesh. Jesus became fully human, even though he was sinless. In the flesh
refers to Christ’s body.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:4 righteous requirement of the law . . . fulfilled. This
could mean the requirement is fulfilled in the new life that Christians live on
the basis of Christ’s work. It could also mean Christ’s death paid the full
penalty of the law.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:6 To set the mind on the flesh means to constantly desire
the things that express fallen, sinful human nature.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:8 Because unbelievers (those who are in the flesh) are
captured by sin and unable to do what God commands, they fail to please God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:9 Paul alternates between the Spirit of God and the
Spirit of Christ here, showing that Christ and God share the same status.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:10 The previous verse speaks of the Spirit’s indwelling,
but here Paul describes Christ’s dwelling in Christians. This does not mean that
there is no difference between Christ and the Spirit. It does suggest that Christ
and the Spirit are both fully God, and they work together. The presence of the
Spirit within believers testifies to the new life they enjoy because Christ’s
righteousness is now theirs.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:13 God and believers each have a role in sanctification. It
must occur by the Spirit and his power, but you put to death shows that one
must take an active role in battling sinful habits.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:15 Christians are no longer slaves to sin. They are
adopted as sons into God’s family. The Spirit assures them that God is their
father. sons. See note on Gal. 3:26. Abba is Aramaic for Father. Paul’s use of
the term likely comes from Jesus’ addressing God in this way (Mark 14:36).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:17 A willingness to follow Christ in suffering is another
sign of being God’s children.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:18–39 Paul began this major section of the letter (5:1–
8:39) by emphasizing the final hope of believers (5:1–11), and now he
concludes with the same emphasis.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:18 The ultimate glory that Christians will receive is so
great that the sufferings of this present time are insignificant in comparison
(see 2 Cor. 4:17). Believers look forward to the resurrection of the body (1
Thess. 4:13–18) and to the new heaven and new earth (Rev. 21:1–22:5; see Isa.
65:17).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:20–21 When Adam sinned, the created world was also
subjected to futility. One thinks of the thorns and thistles that accompany
work on the land (Gen. 3:17–19) and the pain in childbirth for women (Gen.
3:16). The original creation (Genesis 1–2) did not have these things. On the
last day, creation will be freed from the effects of sin. It will be far more
beautiful, productive, and easy to live in than one can ever imagine.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:22 Again creation is personified (see v. 19). It longs for
the day when salvation will be completed.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:23 Christians already have the firstfruits of the Spirit.
But they still await the day of their final adoption, when their bodies, fully
redeemed, are raised from the dead.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:26 Groanings too deep for words (see v. 23) refers to
the believers’ sense of the Spirit’s intercession for them before God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:28 Good in this context means being like Christ (v. 29),
enjoying closer fellowship with God, bearing good fruit for the kingdom, and
final glorification (v. 30). It does not mean earthly pleasures.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:29 God has always been doing good for his people.
foreknew. In the OT, the word “know” emphasizes God’s special choice of his
people (e.g., Gen. 18:19). See Rom. 11:2, where “foreknew” contrasts with
“rejected,” emphasizing God’s choosing his people. God also predestined (that
is, predetermined) that those whom he chose beforehand would become like
Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:30 Those predestined by God are also called to faith
through the gospel (see 2 Thess. 2:14) and justified (declared to be right in
God’s sight). Not all who are invited to believe are actually justified. Thus the
“calling” here must refer to an effective call that creates the faith necessary for
justification (Rom. 5:1). All those who are justified will also be glorified
(receive resurrection bodies) on the last day. Paul speaks of glorification as if it
were already completed, since God will certainly finish the good work he
started (see Phil. 1:6).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:33 Satan, their enemies, or even their own consciences
may bring charges against God’s elect. But God declares them justified.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:34 Who is to condemn? The question in v. 33 is
repeated. Christians will never be condemned, for (1) Christ died for them and
paid the full penalty for their sin; (2) he was raised, showing that his death
removed sin; (3) he now is seated at God’s right hand (Ps. 110:1); and (4) he
intercedes for his people on the basis of his shed blood.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 8:38–39 rulers, powers. Probably angelic and demonic
authorities.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:1–11:36 God’ s Righteousness to Israel and to the
Gentiles. Paul has made it clear that God’s saving promises have been fulfilled
for the Gentiles. He now asks whether the promises God made to ethnic Israel
will be fulfilled. If his promises to the Jews remain unfulfilled, how can
Gentile Christians be sure that he will fulfill for them all the great promises in
ch. 8? Paul answers that God is faithful to his saving promises to Israel (9:6)
and that he will ultimately save his people (11:26).
FACT
Paul’s love for God and his compassion for those who do not know Christ
are clear (see 9:1–5; 10:1, 14–15). Believers’ experience of God’s grace
should motivate them to share the Good News with others all over the world
and to pray that they will believe.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:1–29 God’s saving promises to Israel are irrevocable
since they are based upon his word of promise and his electing grace.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:1–3 Paul suffers great anguish because his Jewish
kinsmen are unsaved (see also 10:1). Indeed, if it were possible, Paul might
almost choose to be accursed (to suffer punishment in hell) so that his fellow
Jews would be saved (see Moses in Ex. 32:30–32).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:4 Israel had great privileges. The Israelites became God’s
adopted people when God saved them from Egypt. Glory here probably refers
to the glory of God in the tabernacle and temple. Israel received the covenants
in which the Lord promised to save them. God gave his people his law at
Mount Sinai. He directed their worship in the Mosaic law, and he gave them
his saving promises.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:5 The patriarchs (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) come from
Israel. Most important, Jesus the Christ is a man from the Jewish people. He is
also fully God, and to be praised as such.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:6–7 Though many Jews have failed to believe, God’s
promise to them has not failed. It was never true that all of the physical
children of Abraham were part of the people of God. Genesis 21:12 teaches
that the line of promise is traced through Isaac, not Ishmael.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:9–10 The promise (Gen. 18:10, 14) was not given to
Hagar (Genesis 16), but specifically to Sarah and her offspring. The birth of
Esau and Jacob is further evidence that God did not promise that every person
of Jewish descent would be saved. They had the same parents, yet God chose
Jacob and not Esau.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:11–13 God did not choose Jacob on the basis of anything
in Jacob or Esau’s life. He did so to fulfill his purpose of election. For the OT
background to “election,” see Gen. 18:10; Ex. 33:19; Mal. 1:2–3. See also Eph.
1:3–6.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:14–16 God is just in choosing one over the other because
no one deserves to be saved (see 3:23). The salvation of anyone at all is due to
God’s mercy alone, as the words taken from Ex. 33:19 affirm.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:17 Paul quotes Ex. 9:16 to show that God is sovereign
over evil as well as good. Even the wrath of man praises God (Ps. 76:10). For
example, God installed Pharaoh as ruler and hardened his heart so that God’s
own saving power and glorious name would be spread throughout the whole
world.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:19 who can resist his will? If salvation ultimately
depends upon God, and he either has mercy on or hardens whomever he
pleases, then how can he charge anyone with guilt?
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:20–21 Paul does not resolve the problem presented in v.
19 on the basis of human free will. Rather, he insists that human beings should
not rebelliously question God’s ways. Like a potter (see Jer. 18:1–6), God has
the right to do what he wishes with his creation. The honorable and
dishonorable vessels represent those who are saved and those who are not
saved. Paul affirms that humans are guilty for their sin, but he offers no
explanation as to how this fits with divine sovereignty. He insists that God
controls all that happens (see Eph. 1:11). God does not sin, and he is not
morally responsible for sin.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:22–23 The salvation of any person is due to the
marvelous grace and love of God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:25–26 Paul quotes Hos. 2:23 and 1:10 to illustrate God’s
amazing grace. Those who are not my people . . . will be called “sons of the
living God.
” In calling the Gentiles to salvation, God calls sinful people to
himself. He did the same with Israel.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:27–29 Isaiah 10:22–23 notes that only some of Israel
would be saved. Most of Israel was judged. Only a remnant experienced
salvation. Indeed, as Isa. 1:9 says, Israel deserved to be wiped out like Sodom
and Gomorrah, but God had mercy and spared some.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:30–11:10 God’s sovereignty is compatible with human
responsibility. Israel should have believed the gospel and trusted in Christ, but
the majority refused to do so. Still, God’s saving promises will be fulfilled.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:32 Following the law to try to establish righteousness led
Israel to stumble over the stone (Christ). If obeying the law can save them,
they see no need to believe in Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 9:33 stumbling. See Isa. 28:16. Those who trust in Christ
will not experience shame on the day of judgment.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:2 The Jews’ zeal and sincerity does not lead them to
salvation. Many sincere “religious” people are wrong in their beliefs.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:3 On the contrast between the two ways to
righteousness, see Gal. 3:7–14.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:4 End probably includes the idea of both goal and
completion. The Mosaic law has reached its goal in Christ. Now the old
covenant has ended. Since Christ is the goal and end of the law, righteousness
belongs to all who trust in Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:5 Paul quotes Lev. 18:5 regarding the righteousness
that is based on the law. All those who keep the law will have life. But as
Paul has already shown, all people violate the law (Rom. 1:18–3:20).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:6–8 Paul quotes Deut. 30:12–14 to show the contrast
between the righteousness based on faith and the righteousness that comes
from the law. There is no need to travel to heaven to bring Christ to earth, for
God has already sent him into the world. Nor should anyone think they must
bring Christ up from the realm of the dead, for God has raised Christ from
the dead. What God requires is not superhuman works but faith in the gospel.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:9–10 if you confess with your mouth. Such confession
gives outward evidence of inward faith, and often confirms that faith to the
speaker. That God raised him from the dead implies a belief in all truth
connected with the resurrection. This includes Jesus’ sin-bearing death,
followed by his resurrection that showed God’s approval of his work (see note
on 4:25). with the heart one believes. Saving faith is deep trust in Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:11 Paul again cites Isa. 28:16 (compare Rom. 9:33) to
emphasize that trusting in Christ (rather than good works) is the way to
salvation. Shame here is the humiliation that those judged on the last day will
experience when they are sent to hell.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:14–15 How then? With a series of rhetorical questions,
Paul considers the chain of events necessary for a person to be saved. The logic
of these verses is clear: (1) People will call on Jesus to save them only if they
believe he can do so; (2) belief in Christ cannot exist without knowledge about
him; (3) one hears about Christ only when someone proclaims the saving
message; and (4) the message about Christ will not be proclaimed unless
someone is sent by God to do so. Paul was so urgent about spreading the
gospel to the ends of the earth because he believed that the only way to be
saved was to hear and believe in the gospel. (Paul is not talking here about OT
believers or infants; see note on 2 Sam. 12:23). beautiful . . . feet. See Isa.
52:7.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:16 Isaiah (Isa. 53:1) prophesies that not all will believe.
In the context of Romans 9–11, Paul is thinking especially of unbelieving Jews.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:17 One can come to faith only through hearing the
word of Christ, that is, the good news about Jesus Christ as the crucified and
risen Savior.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:18–19 They who have heard the message probably
refers to the Jewish people (see vv. 1, 19–20). Paul applies Ps. 19:4 to the
proclamation of the gospel to emphasize that the Jews have heard the good
news because the gospel has gone even to the ends of the world (that is, to the
Gentiles). Israel should have understood from the prophecy of Deut. 32:21 that
the Gentiles would believe.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 10:20–21 Isaiah 65:1 has been fulfilled. Gentiles who did
not seek after God have now experienced God’s saving promises. Israel, on the
other hand, has fulfilled the words of Isa. 65:2. They have rebelled and
disobeyed the gospel message.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:1 The majority of Israel failed to believe. Does this
mean that God has rejected his people? Paul presents himself as an example
of the remnant that has been preserved. This remnant shows that God is not
finished with Israel. He will fulfill his promises to his people.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:2 foreknew. See note on 8:29.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:3–5 God assured Elijah that he had preserved a remnant
who still followed him (1 Kings 19:18). As in Paul’s day and today, a remnant
of Jews believe in Christ because of God’s electing grace (see Rom. 9:27–29).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:7–10 Paul links Isa. 29:10 and Deut. 29:4 to clarify that
God has hardened Israel so that they would not see or hear. Paul then prays for
judgment (Ps. 69:22–23) upon the Jews of his day who have rejected Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:11–32 God’s saving righteousness is seen in the
salvation of Israel at the end of history, and in his saving plan for both Jews
and Gentiles.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:12 World means Gentiles here. Paul argues from the
lesser to the greater. If Israel’s sin brought salvation to the Gentiles, then the
blessing will be even greater when all Israel is saved (see v. 15).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:15 If the rejection of the majority of Israel has meant
that many Gentiles (the world) have been reconciled to God through Christ,
then surely the acceptance of the Jews—their future coming to Christ in large
numbers—will bring about the final resurrection (life from the dead) and the
end of history.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:16 Two illustrations teach the same truth. The firstfruits
and the root probably refer to the patriarchs (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) and
the saving promises given to them. If the firstfruits and root are dedicated to
God, so too are the whole lump (of dough) and the branches (that is, the
Jewish people as a whole). As Paul has already explained in chs. 9–10,
however, not every Jewish person will be saved.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:17 The people of God are portrayed here as an olive tree
(see Jer. 11:16–19; Hos. 14:6–7). When Paul says some branches were
removed, he probably has in mind the majority of the Jews of his day. Gentiles
are the wild shoots grafted into the olive tree that now share in the root (the
promises made to the patriarchs).
FACT
A wild olive branch? Farmers don’t usually graft a wild plant onto a
cultivated one, but Paul says that is just what God has done in grafting the
wild olive branch of the Gentile world onto the cultivated olive tree of his
people Israel (11:11–24). He has done this so that all people everywhere, no
matter what earthly family they come from, can become a part of his family.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:18–20 Gentile believers are warned against arrogance
toward the Jews who were removed (v. 17). It is God’s saving promises (the
root), not their own goodness, that saved them. This should provoke fear and
awe, not pride.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:21 Whether Jew or Gentile, God will not spare anyone
who does not continue to believe.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:22–24 The Gentile readers must contemplate both God’s
kindness and his severity toward them and the Jews who have not believed.
They must continue in faith. Otherwise, they too will be judged as unbelievers.
Paul argues from the lesser to the greater. If God grafted Gentiles, who are the
wild branches, into the olive tree, then surely he will graft back into the olive
tree Jews, who are the natural branches (see v. 17).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:25 Mystery in this case is something previously hidden
that is now revealed.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:26 in this way all Israel will be saved. It seems most
likely that this salvation of the Jewish people is in the future. This
interpretation fits with the promises of God’s future work in vv. 12 and 15, and
the future salvation of ethnic Israel at the end of history agrees with the
character of this passage. God is faithful to fulfill his saving promises to his
people (9:6). “All Israel” refers to a very large number, at least the majority of
Jews. The Deliverer coming from Zion probably refers to Christ (see 1 Thess.
1:10), suggesting that these Jews will be saved near or at Christ’s second
coming.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:28 for your sake. Israel’s unbelief has benefited the
Gentiles. This is the period of history in which Gentiles are being saved, while
most of Israel remains in unbelief. But God’s promise to their forefathers
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob will be fulfilled in the future.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:29 Israel will be saved because God always keeps his
promises. As used here, gifts means the unique blessings given to Israel which
Paul mentioned at the beginning of this long section (9:4–5). Calling refers
here to calling to salvation (see 8:30; 9:11, 24).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:30–31 God saved the Gentiles when one would have
expected only the Jews to be saved. In the future he will amaze all by saving
the Jews. It will be clear that everyone’s salvation is by mercy alone (see note
on 9:14–16). The final now in the text means that the promise of Jewish
salvation could be fulfilled at any time.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:32 The word all here refers to Jews and Gentiles. God’s
mercy is available to all, but not all will accept it.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 11:34–35 Paul quotes Isa. 40:13 and Job 41:11 to highlight
that all good things are gifts from God (1 Cor. 4:7).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:1–15:13 God’ s Righteousness in Everyday Life. The
gift of God’s saving righteousness leads to a new life. Paul explains some
practical results of God’s saving mercy.
Spiritual Gifts in Paul’ s Letters
Romans 12:6–8 1 Corinthians 12:7–10 1 Corinthians 12:28 Ephesians 4:11
Having gifts that differ according to
To each is given the manifestation of the Spirit
God has appointed in the
the grace given to us
for the common good
church And he gave
apostles the apostles
prophecy prophecy prophets the prophets
the evangelists
ability to distinguish between spirits
utterance of wisdom
teaching utterance of knowledge teachers
the shepherds and
teachers
exhorting
working of miracles miracles
gifts of healing service helping
leading administrating
various kinds of tongues gifts of healing
various kinds of tongues
interpretation of tongues
giving
faith
mercy
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:1 Therefore points back to the entire argument in 1:18–
11:36. mercies of God. Sacrificial language from the OT is used to describe
the new life of Christians. Bodies refers to the whole person. Both body and
soul belong to God. Christians are a living sacrifice. They enjoy new life with
Christ (6:4). “Living” also means that they will not be put to death as OT
animal sacrifices were. Spiritual worship means offering one’s whole life to
God (see Heb. 13:15–16).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:2 The present evil age still tempts Christians, so they
must resist its pressure. Their minds are made new (contrast 1:28), so that they
are able to “discern” or understand God’s will. By testing you may discern
translates a Greek word that means finding out the worth of something by
testing it.
FACT
What does “discern” mean? To discern something means to understand it.
For Christians, discernment involves the use of wisdom and the Holy Spirit’s
guidance to figure out how to apply biblical principles to the concrete issues
of life (12:2; see also Eph. 5:10).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:4–5 The diversity and unity of the church is compared to
the human body. (See also 1 Corinthians 12 and Eph. 4:4, 12–16.)
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:6 On the gift of prophecy, see notes on Acts 21:4;
21:10–11; 1 Cor. 12:10; Eph. 2:20; 1 Thess. 5:20–21; and other notes on 1
Corinthians 12–14. in proportion to our faith. Those with the gift of prophecy
should speak only when they are confident that the Holy Spirit is truly
revealing something to them.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:7–8 Christians should use the gifts God has given them,
whether in serving others, teaching God’s Word, or in exhortation and
encouragement.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:9 The rest of the chapter describes the life that pleases
God. Not surprisingly, love heads the list (see note on John 13:34–35).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:13 Hospitality was very important for early Christians,
because most of them could not afford to pay for lodging when traveling.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:14 Bless . . . do not curse. These words reflect the
teaching of Jesus (Matt. 5:44).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:17–19 Repay no one evil. . . . Vengeance is mine. This
alludes to Jesus’ teaching (Matt. 5:39).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 12:20–21 burning coals. See Prov. 25:21–22. Most
interpreters think Paul is teaching that Christians must do good to people so
that the others will feel ashamed and repent. That sense is possible. But in the
OT the concept of “burning coals” always represents punishment (see Ps.
11:6). Thus another interpretation is that Paul is repeating the thought of Rom.
12:19: Christians are to do good to wrongdoers, whom God will punish on the
last day if they refuse to repent. Overcoming evil with good includes acts of
kindness toward evildoers. It may sometimes include the “good” (13:4) of the
civil government stopping evil through the use of force (military or police). See
13:3–4. See note on Prov. 25:21–22.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:1–7 Christians are to be subject to (which generally
means to obey, see 1 Pet. 3:5–6) the government because it has been put in
place by God. Several other passages show that God approves of Christians
disobeying government, but only when obedience to government would mean
disobeying God (see Ex. 1:17, 21; Est. 4:16; Dan. 3:12–18; Acts 5:29; Heb.
11:23).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:1 Sometimes God gives good authorities as a blessing,
and sometimes he allows evil rulers as a means of trial or judgment (2 Chron.
25:20; 32:24–25). On God’s rule over earthly authorities, see Ps. 75:7 and
Dan. 2:21.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:3 rulers are not a terror to good conduct, but to bad.
Civil government in general is a great blessing from God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:4 Governing authorities are God’s servants, for they
carry out his wrath on evildoers, and they do so for your good. Even though
Christians must not take personal revenge (12:17–20), it is right for them to
turn punishment over to the civil authorities, who have the responsibility to
punish evil. Sword most likely refers to capital punishment (see Gen. 9:6).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:5 Christians should obey civil authorities to avoid God’s
wrath (coming through those authorities, v. 4) and because their conscience
tells them to submit to the government (see note on vv. 1–7).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:8 Verses 8–10 focus on the Christian’s relationship to
the Mosaic law. Owe no one anything does not prohibit all borrowing. It
means that one should always “pay what is owed” (see v. 7), fulfilling
whatever agreements have been made.
FACT
Should Christians always pay their taxes? Paul says that paying taxes is one
way in which Christians show honor to the authorities God has placed over
them (13:1–7). Christians should obey their government unless doing so
means disobeying the Lord (Acts 5:29).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:9 Paul cites several OT commandments regarding
responsibility to others. All of these are summarized in the call to love your
neighbor as yourself (Lev. 19:18).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:11–12 The final verses of this section (12:3–13:14) call
Christians to action, given the shortness of the time before Jesus returns.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 13:14 The metaphor of putting on clothing implies
imitating Christ’s character and living in close fellowship with him. This
requires denying the flesh and refusing to gratify its desires.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:1–15:13 Paul addresses a specific dispute, probably over
whether Christians need to follow Jewish food laws. He agrees with the
“strong” (who did not feel compelled to follow those laws), but he encourages
them not to despise or offend the “weak.”
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:1 As for the one who is weak. The strong are tempted
to argue with those weaker in faith.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:2 The strong believe all foods are allowed. The weak eat
only vegetables, probably to avoid eating unclean foods (see Dan. 1:8, 10, 12,
16).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:4 This verse is likely directed to the weak. They are not
to pass judgment on the strong, who answer to their own master (the Lord).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:5 The weak thought some days were more important
than others. Given the Jewish background (see v. 14), the day is the Sabbath.
The strong think every day is the same. Both views are fine. Each person must
follow his own conscience. Unlike the other nine commandments in Ex. 20:1–
17, the Sabbath commandment seems to have been part of the “ceremonial
laws” of the Mosaic covenant. Like the laws about sacrifices and diet, sabbath
observance is not binding on new covenant believers (see also Gal. 4:10; Col.
2:16–17). However, regular times of worship are commanded for Christians
(Heb. 10:24–25; see Acts 20:7).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:10–12 The strong should not despise the weak. The
weak should not judge the strong. Everyone will stand before God, who will
judge all on the last day. The future day of judgment is prophesied in Isa.
45:23. Every person will give an account of his life to God at the judgment.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:14 Christians are no longer under the old covenant, so
Paul rejects the view that some foods are unclean (see Leviticus 11;
Deuteronomy 14). Still, if anyone thinks certain foods are unclean, then that
person should avoid them.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:15–17 For the sake of the weak, the strong should
refrain from eating certain foods. They must be careful not to destroy the faith
of a brother or sister. Lack of love for the weak contradicts Christ’s love. God’s
kingdom centers on the gifts of righteousness, peace, and joy granted by the
Holy Spirit. Bodily appetites are secondary in importance.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:20–21 Paul urges the strong not to destroy God’s work
in the weak by eating food that will offend them.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:22 The strong are likely addressed here. The faith that
you have means their faith that they may eat anything (see vv. 1–2, 23). They
are not asked to change their convictions, but they should not behave in a way
that injures the faith of others and so brings judgment on themselves.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 14:23 No one should eat unclean food if he has doubts
about the rightness of the activity. Indeed, anything believers do apart from
faith is sin.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:1–3 Christ is the supreme example of strengthening
others and living for the glory of God. Paul quotes Ps. 69:9 to make this point.
FACT
Paul had not visited Rome when he wrote this letter, but he sent personal
greetings to more than 25 individually named men and women plus
households (16:3–15). He obviously cared deeply for his Christian brothers
and sisters and appreciated their work for Christ.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:4 for our instruction . . . encouragement. All the
words of the OT are the words of God. They teach believers how to live in a
way that pleases God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:8 circumcised. The Jews. In fulfilling God’s saving
promises to the Jews, God shows truthfulness and faithfulness to his word.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:9–12 Paul cites verses from 2 Sam. 22:50 (or Ps. 18:49);
Deut. 32:43; Ps. 117:1; and Isa. 11:10. The OT clearly emphasizes the inclusion
of the Gentiles into the people of God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:14–16:23 The Extension of God’ s Righteousness
through Paul’ s Mission. Paul focuses on his calling as the apostle to the
Gentiles, adding some greetings and final instructions.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:14 Instruct often means warning against wrong conduct
(compare 1 Cor. 4:14; 1 Thess. 5:12, 14; 2 Thess. 3:15).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:16 Gentile converts are the offering Paul presents to
God.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:19 By the power of signs and wonders refers to the
miracles God did through Paul during his ministry. Miracles pointed to the
power of God (see Acts 5:12; 2 Cor. 12:12; Heb. 2:4). Paul has fulfilled his
charge to preach the gospel among the Gentiles from Jerusalem to Illyricum
(roughly the area that is now Albania and was formerly Yugoslavia). Churches
have been planted in key places. From there Paul’s coworkers will bring the
gospel to more remote areas (e.g., Epaphras in Colossae, Col. 1:7).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:20–21 Paul’s aim was to preach the gospel where no
churches existed, fulfilling Isa. 52:15.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:22–24 Paul had been stopped from coming to Rome
because he had not completed his work of planting churches in unreached
eastern parts of the Roman Empire (v. 22), but now he feels that his work in the
east has come to an end (vv. 23–24). He hopes to see the Roman church. He
wants them to be his base of support for his mission to Spain. No visit of Paul
to Spain is recorded in the NT. It is possible that he went there after the events
recorded in Acts 28:30–31.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:25 He cannot visit Rome immediately. Paul’s next task
is to travel to Jerusalem to bring the money he had collected for the poor
saints there (see 1 Cor. 16:1–4; 2 Corinthians 8–9).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:26 Macedonia and Achaia are roughly equivalent to
northern and southern Greece today, including such cities as Philippi,
Thessalonica, and Corinth.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:27 they were pleased. The Gentiles enjoy the spiritual
blessings of the Jewish people. They should happily assist them financially.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 15:31 delivered from the unbelievers. Paul did go to
Rome, even if it was not in the way he anticipated (see Acts 22–28).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:1–23 Paul warmly greets those he knows in Rome. He is
able to say something specific about almost every person greeted.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:1 Phoebe probably brought this epistle to the Romans.
servant. The Greek word can mean either “servant” (13:4; 15:8; 1 Cor. 3:5; 1
Tim. 4:6) or “deacon” (referring to a church office; Phil. 1:1; 1 Tim. 3:8, 12).
Cenchreae. See note on Acts 18:18.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:2 Paul asks the church to assist Phoebe since she has
helped so many. Phoebe served as a patron, probably offering financial
assistance and hospitality to other believers.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:3 Prisca and Aquila. See 1 Cor. 16:19; 2 Tim. 4:19.
Prisca is called Priscilla in Acts 18:2–3, 18, 26.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:4 Perhaps Prisca and Aquila risked their lives when
Paul was in danger in Ephesus (Acts 19:23–41; 1 Cor. 15:32; 2 Cor. 1:8–11).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:5 the church in their house. See note on 1 Cor. 16:19.
Apparently a church met in the home of Prisca and Aquila. Asia here refers to a
province in what is modern-day Turkey.
AQUILA AND HIS WIFE, PRISCILLA
Aquila and his wife, Priscilla (also called Prisca), were close friends and
coworkers with the apostle Paul. Forced from Rome by the emperor
Claudius, they fled to Corinth (18:1–2). Like Paul, who stayed in their home,
they were tentmakers by trade. On his way back to Antioch, Paul left
Priscilla and Aquila in Ephesus to establish the church in that city. There the
godly couple taught the Christian way “more accurately” to a gifted
Alexandrian disciple named Apollos (18:26). They were eventually able to
return to Rome, where the church met in their home (Rom. 16:3–5). Paul’s
deep love and respect for Aquila and Priscilla is obvious in his letter to the
Romans, where he declares that the couple “risked their necks” for his life
(Rom. 16:3). (Romans 16:3–5)
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:7 Andronicus and Junia were probably a husband-and-
wife ministry team. Most scholars now think that Junia was a woman, though
some have argued that a man named Junias is in view (the spelling would be
the same in Greek). The verse seems to be saying that Andronicus and Junia
were well known to the apostles, not that Junia was herself an apostle. This
passage also reveals that the couple was Jewish, had been imprisoned, and had
become Christians before Paul.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:8–10 The people greeted in these verses are not
mentioned elsewhere in the NT. The family of Aristobulus probably refers to
the slaves in Aristobulus’s household. Some think Aristobulus is the grandson
of Herod the Great (c. 73–4 B.C.) and the brother of Herod Agrippa I (10 B.C.–
A.D. 44).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:11 The family of Narcissus refers to the slaves in
Narcissus’s household. Some scholars think Narcissus was the wealthy
freedman who served the emperor Claudius (A.D. 41–54). Nero’s mother,
Agrippina, forced Narcissus to kill himself when Nero became emperor (A.D.
54).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:13 Rufus. Possibly the son of Simon of Cyrene (Mark
15:21). Apparently Rufus’s mother ministered significantly to Paul.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:16 Christians greeted one another with a holy kiss to
show their warm affection (see note on 1 Cor. 16:20; also 2 Cor. 13:12; 1
Thess. 5:26; 1 Pet. 5:14).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:20 This is an allusion to Gen. 3:15.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:21 Those who are with Paul greet the Romans. Timothy
is probably Paul’s most beloved coworker in ministry. Lucius is unknown.
Jason is likely the same person named in Acts 17:5–7, 9. Sosipater is probably
the same person as Sopater from Berea (Acts 20:4).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:22 Tertius functioned as Paul’s secretary for the letter. It
was common for those writing letters in the first century to dictate to a
secretary, but the content of the letter is clearly Paul’s.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:23 Gaius here is the Gaius of 1 Cor. 1:14. This supports
the idea that the letter was written from Corinth. He was a man of some wealth,
for he provided a place for the entire church to meet. It is difficult to know if
Erastus is the person mentioned in Acts 19:22 and 2 Tim. 4:20.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:25–27 Final Summary of the Gospel of God’ s
Righteous­ ness. Many of the themes in the introduction reappear in the
conclusion.
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:26 prophetic writings. The OT Scriptures (see 1:2).
ROMANS—NOTE ON 16:27 glory forevermore. God’s glory is to be the theme of
Christians’ lives and the joy of their hearts.
The Epistles
Book Author Date Recipients Place of Writing
James James 40–45 Jewish Christians in or near Palestine Jerusalem?
Galatians Paul 48 South Galatian churches Syrian Antioch
1 Thessalonians Paul 49–51 Church in Thessalonica Corinth
2 Thessalonians Paul 49–51 Church in Thessalonica Corinth
1 Corinthians Paul 53–55 Church in Corinth Ephesus
2 Corinthians Paul 55–56 Church in Corinth Macedonia
Romans Paul 57 Church in Rome Corinth
Philippians Paul 62 Church in Philippi Rome
Colossians Paul 62 Church in Colossae Rome
Philemon Paul 62 Philemon Rome
Ephesians Paul 62 Churches in Asia Minor (circular letter?) Rome
1 Timothy Paul 62–64 Timothy Macedonia?
Titus Paul 62–64 Titus Nicopolis
1 Peter Peter 62–63 Churches in Roman provinces in Asia Minor Rome
2 Peter Peter 64–67 Churches in Roman provinces in Asia Minor? Rome
2 Timothy Paul 64–67 Timothy Rome
Jude Jude Mid–60s Jewish Christians in Egypt? Asia Minor? Antioch? Unknown
Hebrews Unknown 60–70 Jewish Christians in Rome or in or near Palestine Unknown
1 John John 85–95 Churches near Ephesus? Ephesus
2 John John 85–95 Church or churches near Ephesus Ephesus
3 John John 85–95 Gaius Ephesus
1 Corinthians
(return to table of contents)
1 Corinthians 1 • 1 Corinthians 2 • 1 Corinthians 3 • 1 Corinthians 4
•
1 Corinthians 5 • 1 Corinthians 6 • 1 Corinthians 7 • 1 Corinthians 8
•
1 Corinthians 9 • 1 Corinthians 10 • 1 Corinthians 11 • 1 Corinthians 12
•
1 Corinthians 13 • 1 Corinthians 14 • 1 Corinthians 15 • 1 Corinthians 16
Introduction to 1 Corinthians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of 1 Corinthians
Global Message of 1 Corinthians
First Corinthians and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in 1 Corinthians
The Global Message of 1 Corinthians for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to 1 Corinthians
Introduction to 1 Corinthians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
The apostle Paul wrote this letter to the Corinthian church in the spring of A.D.
53, 54, or 55. This was near the end of his three-year ministry in Ephesus.
Altogether Paul wrote four letters to this church: (1) the previous letter
mentioned in 1 Corinthians 5:9; (2) 1 Corinthians; (3) the tearful, severe letter
mentioned in 2 Corinthians 2:3–4; and (4) 2 Corinthians. Only 1 and 2
Corinthians have survived.
Theme
The Corinthian church, divided because of the arrogance of its more powerful
members, should work together for the advancement of the gospel. They
should repent of their rivalries, build up the faith of those who are weak, and
witness effectively to unbelievers.
Purpose
Paul received an oral report and a letter from the Corinthian church. These
revealed a church struggling with division, immorality, idolatry, and
theological confusion. He wrote them this letter so that they would become a
true dwelling place for God’s Spirit (3:12, 16), stay faithful to the gospel, and
be “guiltless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ” (1:8).
Key Themes
1. The church is the dwelling place of God’s Spirit. Thus, the people who
make up the church should work for unity by building each other up
(1:10–4:21, especially 3:10–16; 14:12).
2. Christians should build up the church in four practical ways:
a. they should be sensitive to those with fragile faith (8:1–9:18; 10:28, 33).
b. they should win unbelievers to the faith (9:19–23; 10:27, 32–33).
c. they should conduct worship services in such a way that unbelievers might
come to faith (14:16, 23–25).
d. their corporate worship should use spiritual gifts not out of personal pride,
or for evaluating who has the better gift, but to build up the church (11:2–16;
12:12–30; 14:1–35).
1. Sexual relations form a union between man and woman as deep as the
union of the believer with Christ. Therefore sexual activity should be
confined to marriage (5:1–13; 6:12–20; 7:5, 9, 36).
2. Baptism and the Lord’s Supper are important. Yet both are less important
than personal trust in the gospel and living in the way God commands
(1:14–17; 10:1–5; 11:17–34; 15:29–34).
3. The bodily resurrection of Jesus (and of his followers) from the dead is a
key truth of the Christian faith (6:14; 15:1–58).
Outline
I. Introduction to the Letter’s Main Themes (1:1–9)
II. Divisions over Christian Preachers (1:10–4:21)
III. A Report of Sexual Immorality and Lawsuits (5:1–6:20)
IV . Three Issues from the Corinthians’ Letter (7:1–11:1)
V . Divisions over Corporate Worship (11:2–14:40)
VI. The Futility of Faith If the Dead Are Not Raised (15:1–58)
VII. The Collection for the Saints and Travel Plans (16:1–12)
VIII. Closing Admonitions and Greetings (16:13–24)
The Setting of 1 Corinthians
c. A.D. 53–55
Paul wrote 1 Corinthians during his third missionary journey, near the end of
his three-year ministry in Ephesus (Acts 19:21–22). Both Corinth and Ephesus
were wealthy port cities steeped in pagan idolatry and philosophy. Corinth
benefited both militarily and economically from its strategic location at one
end of the isthmus that connected the southern Greek peninsula to the
mainland.
The Global Message of 1 Corinthians
The global message of 1 Corinthians is that the gospel of Jesus Christ is
relevant to every dimension of church life. To a church facing many
problems, Paul writes of God’s empowering grace and the need to know
Christ alone and him crucified. There is much for the global church today to
learn from this important letter.
First Corinthians and Redemptive History
Paul’s vision in 1 Corinthians stretches all the way back to the first man,
Adam (1 Cor. 15:21–22), and all the way forward to the future return of
Jesus (15:23–24). Paul places his letter to the Corinthian church against the
backdrop of the massive sweep of world history. The Corinthians
themselves are part of that history. And as equal members of the body of
Christ, so are Christians today, wherever in the world they may live.
Because Christ is the center point of all human history, we see Paul
connecting both the Old Testament past and his own present ministry to
Christ himself. Indeed, for Paul, because Christ has come we are now those
“on whom the end of the ages has come” (1 Cor. 10:11). Paul warns the
Corinthians against idolatrous desires by reminding them of what had
become of Israel when they wandered in the wilderness. Yet Paul also
makes the surprising statement that the rock from which Israel drank was
Christ himself (10:4). All of God’s divine provision for his people
foreshadows, and is fulfilled in, Jesus Christ.
Today, then, we live as those “on whom the end of the ages has come.”
We live mindful of Christ and the supreme provision God has worked out
for us in him, freely available to all those around the world who will forsake
worldly ways of thought and life and trust in him.
Universal Themes in 1 Corinthians
The folly of human wisdom. Paul speaks in the opening chapters of 1
Corinthians of the folly of human wisdom—that is, worldly patterns of
thinking that exalt human competency and cleverness. This is contrary to
the cross of Christ, where God turned the world’s wisdom upside down by
providing salvation through a crucified man rather than a conquering king.
As Paul puts it, “Jews demand signs and Greeks seek wisdom, but we
preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and folly to Gentiles” (1
Cor. 1:22–23). The gospel addresses every culture around the world at the
very point where it believes itself to be strongest, and offers Christ instead
as an alternate source of wisdom (1:28–31).
The power of the Spirit. The Corinthian church was infected with a view
of life that focused on worldly glory, human triumph, eloquent speech, and
natural strength (e.g., 1 Cor. 4:7–20). For this reason, when Paul came to
preach to them, they disrespected him due to his lack of style and eloquence
(2:1–5; 4:1–7). Yet Paul’s lack of worldly impressiveness was precisely
what unlocked the power of the Spirit in his life and through his ministry.
His preaching was effective not because of any words of human wisdom but
because it involved a “demonstration of the Spirit and of power” (2:4).
Across the globe, this remains the crying need of preaching, regardless of
the cultural garb in which the preaching is clothed: the church must
proclaim the gospel in the power of the Holy Spirit, not in human wisdom,
so that the faith of the hearers “might not rest in the wisdom of men but in
the power of God” (2:5).
The body of Christ. The fullest biblical description of the church, the
body of Christ, is in 1 Corinthians. Paul tells us in chapters 12–14 that all
the various members of the Christian church—whatever their particular
gifts, whatever their particular location—are part of Christ’s own body. And
the significance of the various parts of the body ought not to be
underestimated. Indeed, some body parts that appear least important are in
fact crucial to the proper functioning of the body (1 Cor. 12:22–25).
The Global Message of 1 Corinthians for Today
In the world, but not of the world. The heart of the problem in the church at
Corinth was that the world was influencing them rather than they
influencing the world. In the opening chapters especially, Paul reminds the
Corinthians that the wisdom of God is foolishness to the world, and the
wisdom of the world is foolishness to God. The Corinthians were not only
in the world but also of it, whereas Christ calls believers to be in the world
but not of it (John 17:14–19). Christians around the globe today are called
to live in faithful presence among their unbelieving neighbors, influencing
them with the love of Christ rather than being infected by worldly patterns
of thinking (Rom. 12:1–2). We are to be salt and light to a lost world (Matt.
5:13–16).
Global unity. In his final prayer for the church, Christ prayed above all
for unity among the generations of believers who would follow the apostles
(John 17:20–21). Yet the situation in Corinth was a mess of dissension and
factions (1 Cor. 1:10–17; 3:1–8, 21–23). Down through history and around
the world such disunity has often plagued God’s people. This is deeply
offensive to the heart of God, and it is also confusing to nonbelievers as
they wonder why Christians don’t “practice what they preach.” The global
church is called, now as much as at any other time in history, to labor for
unity—never by compromising doctrinal truth, but rather by celebrating our
common fellowship in the family of God wherever genuine faith in Christ is
exercised. The way such common faith is expressed may be quite different
culturally or in other ways, but the beauty of the body of Christ will be seen
in a single, unitive, though diversely expressed, love for Christ.
Love. The main way unity of faith will be seen is through love (1 Cor.
8:1; 13:1–14:1; 16:14). Across cultures, classes, languages, and borders,
nothing is more central to the Christian life than love. Indeed, love is
definitive of Christian living (1 John 4:7–12). Beneath the various surface-
level distinguishing marks of Christian people, the global church is called to
clothe itself with love toward one another and toward the world. Such love,
moreover, will be more than words; it will also be actions:
By this we know love, that he laid down his life for us, and we
ought to lay down our lives for the brothers. But if anyone has the
world’s goods and sees his brother in need, yet closes his heart against
him, how does God’s love abide in him? Little children, let us not love
in word or talk but in deed and in truth. (1 John 3:16–18)
Greeting