RUTH 4 [†]Now Boaz had gone up to x the gate and sat down there. And
behold, y the redeemer, of whom Boaz had spoken, came by. So Boaz said,
“Turn aside, friend; sit down here.” And he turned aside and sat down. 2And
he took ten men z of the elders of the city and said, “Sit down here.” So they
sat down. 3[†]Then he said to the redeemer, “Naomi, who has come back
from the country of Moab, is selling the parcel of land that belonged to our
relative Elimelech. 4So I thought I would tell you of it and say, a ‘Buy it in
the presence of those sitting here and in the presence of the elders of my
people.’ If you will redeem it, redeem it. But if you [1] will not, tell me, that
I may know, for there is no one besides you to redeem it, and I come after
you.” And he said, “I will redeem it.” 5Then Boaz said, “The day you buy
the field from the hand of Naomi, you also acquire Ruth [2] the Moabite, the
widow of the dead, in order b to perpetuate the name of the dead in his
inheritance.” 6 c Then the redeemer said, “I cannot redeem it for myself, lest
I impair my own inheritance. Take my right of redemption yourself, for I
cannot redeem it.”
7[†] d Now this was the custom in former times in Israel concerning
redeeming and exchanging: to confirm a transaction, the one drew off his
sandal and gave it to the other, and this was the manner of attesting in
Israel. 8So when the redeemer said to Boaz, “Buy it for yourself,” he drew
off his sandal. 9Then Boaz said to the elders and all the people, “You are
witnesses this day that I have bought from the hand of Naomi all that
belonged to Elimelech and all that belonged to e Chilion and to Mahlon.
10[†]Also Ruth the Moabite, the widow of Mahlon, I have bought to be my
wife, f to perpetuate the name of the dead in his inheritance, that the name
of the dead may not be cut off from among his brothers and from the gate of
his native place. You are witnesses this day.” 11[†]Then all the people who
were g at the gate and the elders said, “We are witnesses. May the LORD
make the woman, who is coming into your house, like Rachel and Leah,
h who together i built up the house of Israel. May you act worthily in
j Ephrathah and k be renowned in Bethlehem, 12[†]and may your house be
like the house of Perez, l whom Tamar bore to Judah, because m of the
offspring that the LORD will give you by this young woman.”
Ruth and Boaz Marry
13[†]So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his wife. And he went in to her,
n and the LORD gave her conception, and she bore a son. 14[†] o Then the
women said to Naomi, “Blessed be the LORD, who has not left you this day
without p a redeemer, and may his name q be renowned in Israel! 15[†]He
shall be to you a restorer of life and a nourisher of your old age, for your
daughter-in-law who loves you, r who is more to you than seven sons, has
given birth to him.” 16Then Naomi took the child and laid him on her lap
and became his nurse. 17[†] s And the women of the neighborhood gave him
a name, saying, “A son has been born to Naomi.” They named him Obed.
He was the father of Jesse, the father of David.
The Genealogy of David
18[†]Now these are the generations of Perez: t Perez fathered Hezron,
19Hezron fathered Ram, Ram fathered Amminadab, 20[†] u Amminadab
fathered Nahshon, Nahshon fathered Salmon, 21[†]Salmon fathered Boaz,
Boaz fathered Obed, 22[†]Obed fathered Jesse, and Jesse fathered David.
Study Notes for Ruth
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:1–5 Introduction: Naomi’ s Family Dies. This brief
introduction tells how Naomi lost her entire family.
Family of Ruth
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:1 days when the judges ruled. (See Judg. 2:6–3:6.) A
famine was sometimes a divine punishment (Deut. 11:14; 32:24; compare
Lev. 26:3–4), but it could also advance God’s purposes, as it did for Israel in
Joseph’s time (Gen. 45:5–8; Ps. 105:16–45). Bethlehem (which means
“house of bread”) was in a fertile region. to sojourn. To be a resident alien
(Deut. 24:17). Moab. A country across the Dead Sea from Judah, and one of
Israel’s enemies.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:2 This verse lists the clan (Ephrathites), city
(Bethlehem), and tribal territory (Judah) of the family (see note on 4:11;
see 1 Sam. 17:12).
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:4 Moabite wives. While Israelites were strictly forbidden
to marry Canaanites (Deut. 7:1–4), there was no specific prohibition against
their marrying Moabites. However, all intermarriage was discouraged
because of the commitment of other nations to other gods (such as Molech).
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:5 Elimelech had no living brothers. A childless widow
such as Naomi would have faced an uncertain future, including the lack of
financial support.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:6–22 Scene 1: Naomi Returns to Bethlehem with
Ruth. This first scene relates Ruth’s kindness in returning with Naomi to
Bethlehem.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:6 the LORD had visited. God had sent rain to Bethlehem;
now, in the springtime, there would be food.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:7 The repeated mentions of daughters-in-law (vv. 6, 7, 8)
and “my daughters” (vv. 11, 12, 13) show Naomi’s love for them.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:8–9 return each of you to her mother’s house. Naomi
hopes that both Ruth and Orpah will remarry and have children. find rest . .
. in the house of her husband. She hopes they will find security and
stability in raising a family (compare 3:1).
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:11–13 sons in my womb . . . your husbands. Naomi’s
question assumes that the widows could marry their dead husbands’ brothers
(levirate marriage, Deut. 25:5–10). Even if it had been possible for Naomi to
have another son, however, he would not be able to give Orpah or Ruth a
child for many years. This is not a solution to their problem. the hand of the
LORD . . . against me. Naomi wrongly thinks her hard circumstances come
from God’s anger toward her.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:14 Ruth clung to Naomi, an expression of loyalty and
devotion (compare Gen. 2:24, “hold fast”).
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:15 Orpah’s returning to her people meant returning to her
gods (see Judg. 10:6).
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:16 Your people shall be my people, and your God my
God. Ruth understood that her decision would mean accepting Naomi’s
God, since gods and territory went together (compare 2:12).
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:17 May the LORD do so to me. Ruth swears this oath in
the name of Yahweh (compare 1 Sam. 3:17; 1 Kings 2:23), thereby claiming
him as her God.
RUTH
Naomi, along with her husband and two sons, moved from Israel to Moab
to seek relief from a famine. In Moab, one of her sons married Ruth, a
Moabite. When Naomi’s husband and sons died, she decided to return to
her home in Bethlehem. Naomi urged Ruth to stay behind in her native
land, but out of love for her mother-in-law, Ruth chose to return with her
to Bethlehem and to serve the Lord. Following her mother-in-law’s daring
plan, Ruth took courageous steps to provide a new family for herself and
Naomi. She married Boaz, and they had a son, Obed, who became the
grandfather of King David. This means that Ruth was included in the
lineage of Jesus Christ. Ruth’s expression of love for her mother-in-law
(1:16–17) has set a high standard for godly relationships down through the
ages. (Ruth 1:16–17)
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:19 the whole town was stirred. This may mean the
people of Bethlehem were excited about the arrival of Ruth. More likely, it
means they were concerned to see Naomi returning from Moab without her
husband and sons.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:20–21 the LORD has testified against me. Naomi thinks
her suffering means that God is punishing her for some unknown sin.
RUTH—NOTE ON 1:22 Ruth is often referred to as the Moabite. This helps to
emphasize how God’s kindness extends through the Israelites to other
nations (2:20) and also how God can choose to bless Israel through the
kindness of people from other nations (3:10; 4:13–22). barley harvest. In
April/May, a few weeks before the wheat harvest (see 2:23).
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:1–23 Scene 2: Ruth Gleans in Boaz’ s Field. This
encounter between Ruth and Boaz in the harvest field is one of their two
crucial meetings.
FACT
Gleaning was the Hebrew practice of allowing the poor to follow behind
those harvesting crops to gather any food or grain left by the harvesters.
Gleaners often worked from morning to evening, to gather enough to
sustain themselves and their families. After sundown they would take the
gathered grain and thresh it to separate the edible portion from the husk.
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:1 Boaz is described as worthy, which can refer to one’s
character, wealth, social standing, or strength. The same word is used to
describe Ruth (3:11).
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:2 glean. The poor, sojourners, widows, and orphans were
allowed to gather standing grain in corners or borders of fields, as well as
stalks or sheaves that had been left behind by workers (Lev. 19:9–10; Deut.
24:19). in whose sight I shall find favor. See note on Ruth 2:10.
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:3 From a human point of view, Ruth just happened to be
in the right place. But in fact she was there through God’s mysterious
providence.
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:8–9 Boaz has charged the young men working in his field
(see vv. 15, 21, 22) not to touch Ruth, to ensure her safety.
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:10 found favor. Ruth wonders why Boaz would act so
kindly toward her. Ruth calls herself a foreigner, but because of her loyalty
to Naomi and to the Lord she has become a sojourner, who can enjoy many
of the rights of an Israelite (Lev. 24:22; Num. 9:14; 15:14–16; Ezek. 47:22–
23).
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:12 wings . . . refuge. Compare Ps. 36:7; 57:1; Matt.
23:37.
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:17–18 Gleaning went from early morning (v. 7) to
evening, that is, before sundown. After sundown was the time to beat out or
winnow what had been gathered (see note on 3:2). An ephah of barley is
about 5.5 gallons (22 liters)—at least a two-week supply for the two women.
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:20 Whose kindness could refer to both the kindness of
Boaz and the kindness of the Lord. Naomi foresees that this kindness will be
shown to the living (Ruth) in marriage (Deut. 25:5–6; Ruth 4:10a, 13) and
also to Naomi’s dead husband and sons (1:8) by continuing their name
through the birth of children to Ruth (4:5, 10; Lev. 25:23, 25). close relative
. . . one of our redeemers. Boaz is neither the closest relative to Naomi nor
the only one (see note on Ruth 3:12–13). This situation combines two
Israelite customs: the redemption of family land and levirate marriage (see
Introduction: Key Themes; “Redemption”).
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:21 Moabite. See note on 1:22. close by my young men.
See note on 2:8–9.
RUTH—NOTE ON 2:23 The barley harvest was in April/May, and the wheat
harvest was a few weeks later (see 1:22).
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:1–18 Scene 3: Ruth, at the Threshing Floor, Asks Boaz to
Marry Her. This is the second crucial encounter between Ruth and Boaz.
FACT
Threshing floors were places where grain was separated from the chaff.
The floor was usually packed clay soil that had been worn smooth.
Sheaves of grain were spread out on the floor and trampled upon, ideally
by oxen. The oxen would also drag notched wooden sleds which would
help pull the grain from the sheaves. Thieves would often try to steal grain
during harvest time. Thus, it was not uncommon for the workers to sleep
at the threshing floor.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:1 rest. See note on 1:8–9. be well with you. By having
children (see Deut. 6:3).
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:2 winnowing . . . tonight. The winnowing took place
during the breezes that begin after sundown (see note on 2:17–18). The
threshing floor would have been east of the city so that the westerly wind
would carry the chaff away from the city.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:3 Wash . . . anoint . . . put on. She must make herself
attractive and meet Boaz at the right time.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:4 To uncover his feet and lie down there (vv. 8, 14) will
demonstrate Ruth’s dependence on Boaz in view of her bold marriage
proposal (v. 9). Some scholars believe that “uncover his feet” implies sexual
contact, but there is no evidence for this, and it would be out of place in this
story.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:9 Ruth, your servant. A maidservant was considered a
full member of an Israelite household (e.g., Ex. 20:10) and could give birth
to an heir (see Gen. 30:3–4, 9). In Ruth 2:12, Boaz had expressed his hope
that Ruth would find the refuge she was looking for, under the Lord’s
“wings.” Now, Ruth invites Boaz to spread his wings (that is, the edge of
his garment; see esv footnote) over her in order to claim her in marriage.
redeemer. See note on 3:12–13.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:10 this last kindness. That is, Ruth claiming Boaz as her
redeemer (v. 9). Boaz was impressed that Ruth was not merely seeking
marriage with eligible young men. Ruth’s first act of kindness was her
earlier acts of kindness to Naomi (2:11). “This last kindness” was greater
than Ruth’s earlier kindnesses to Naomi, because of all the people who
would be affected by her thus continuing the family line.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:11 worthy woman. See note on 2:1; compare Prov. 31:10,
“excellent wife,” using the same Hebrew expression.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:12–13 redeemer nearer. The order of these relations is:
brother, uncle, cousin, or other close relative (Lev. 25:48–49; Num. 27:11;
see Introduction: Key Themes; “Redemption”). as the LORD lives. A solemn
oath (compare Judg. 8:19; 1 Kings 2:24).
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:14 Let it not be known. Boaz is concerned for propriety
and for his and Ruth’s good reputation.
RUTH—NOTE ON 3:15 six measures of barley. Boaz’s ample supply would
also confirm his intentions to Naomi (v. 17).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:1–12 Scene 4: Boaz Arranges Redemption at the Gate.
Both verb and noun forms of “redeem” occur throughout this scene
(compare 2:20; 3:9, 12, 13; 4:14).
FACT
Redemption is a key theme in the book of Ruth. The words “redeem,”
“redeemer,” and “redemption” appear 23 times.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:1–2 The city gate served as a combined town hall and
courthouse (compare 2 Sam. 15:2; Job 29:7–17; Prov. 22:22; 31:23; Amos
5:10). Elders witnessed transactions (Ruth 4:4, 9–11; see Deut. 25:7) and
decided legal cases (see Deut. 21:19; 22:15).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:3–6 Redemption is referred to here in terms of buying and
selling (vv. 4, 5, 8, 9, 10; Ps. 74:2; Jer. 32:7). When the “redeemer nearer”
learns that Ruth will become his wife as part of the transaction, he changes
his mind. Apparently he was concerned that any son born to him and Ruth
would share the inheritance already planned for his present children.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:7–8 in former times. The practice must be explained
since the readers of the book of Ruth no longer do this. exchanging.
Transferring the right of redemption (v. 6). sandal. A symbol of this
exchange (compare Ps. 60:8; Amos 2:6; 8:6).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:10 Moabite (see note on 1:22). To preserve the family
property, Ruth was bought (redeemed) to be Boaz’s wife (see 4:13; Deut.
25:5). not be cut off from among his brothers. That is, from his clan
relatives (Ruth 4:3). from the gate. Men of this family may have held
prominent positions in the gate. His . . . place refers to his social standing.
BOAZ
When Naomi and her Moabite daughter-in-law Ruth came to Bethlehem
as childless widows to start a new life, they encountered Boaz, a relative
of Naomi’s deceased husband. He was a good man who allowed the poor
to glean in his field, as God commanded in the Law. The report of Ruth’s
loyalty to Naomi and to the Lord impressed him, and he protected Ruth
while she worked in his field. By Israelite tradition, Boaz was among
those who could rescue Naomi and Ruth from poverty. He could do so by
redeeming Naomi’s ancestral land and by marrying Ruth, thus providing
heirs for Naomi’s and Ruth’s deceased husbands. After Ruth revealed her
interest in Boaz, he agreed to do all of this. As he and Ruth moved toward
marriage, Boaz was very careful to make sure that everything was done in
an orderly and honorable way. Boaz and Ruth became the parents of
Obed, who became King David’s grandfather. (Ruth 4:9–10)
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:11 Rachel and Leah. Through childbearing they built up
the house of Israel, that is, established and continued Jacob’s family (Deut.
25:9; Ps. 127:1, 3). Through Boaz’s offspring, David’s family, or “house,”
was built (2 Sam. 7:11, 26). David’s selection as king was the pride of
Ephrathah and Bethlehem (see note on Ruth 1:2; see 1 Sam. 17:12).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:12 Perez. Ancestor of the preeminent Judean Perezite clan
(Num. 26:20–21) and of prominent leaders (1 Chron. 9:4; 27:2–3; Neh.
11:4–6; Matt. 1:3). Tamar, Judah. See Gen. 38:6–8. offspring. See Ruth
4:17; Ps. 89:4, 29.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:13–17 Conclusion: Naomi Blessed with a New Family.
The conclusion serves as the reversal of the introduction. The Lord, through
Ruth’s love, restores Naomi’s life.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:13 The word son sounds like “built up” (v. 11). The son is
the one through whom the house (1:9; 4:11, 12) is built.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:14 Calling the heir a redeemer indicates that he is the one
in whom redemption is realized.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:15 Naomi had complained that the Lord had “brought me
back empty” (1:21). But now, he will be a restorer of life for her. who loves
you. Ruth’s love for Naomi has been steadfast throughout the book (see
1:16–17). The number seven expresses completion, or fullness; this is the
answer to Naomi’s complaint against God (see note on 1:20–21).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:17 son . . . to Naomi. Elimelech’s heir (v. 9). The Lord,
through Ruth, also rewards Naomi (2:12) and gives her rest (1:9; 3:1). The
childless widow became the grandmother of Obed, who was the grandfather
of David.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:18–22 Genealogy: Extended Blessing. Looking backward
and forward, this genealogy (compare 1 Chron. 2:5–15) shows how the Lord
repaid and rewarded Ruth, as Boaz desired (Ruth 2:12). The Lord brought
about a new family line which became, through David, the greatest in all
Israel. Jesus’ genealogy includes three foreign women—Tamar, Rahab, and
Ruth (Matt. 1:3, 5).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:18 Perez. See notes on v. 12 and Matt. 1:3. In a
genealogy, the word “fathered” can mean fathered a later descendant; thus
biblical genealogies, including this one, may skip generations.
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:20 Nahshon, Aaron’s brother-in-law, was a leader among
the Judean clans (Ex. 6:23; Num. 1:7; 10:14).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:21 Salmon fathered Boaz by Rahab (Matt. 1:5; see Josh.
6:25).
RUTH—NOTE ON 4:22 Boaz and Ruth’s family eventually includes David.
From David will come the Messiah.
1 Samuel
(return to table of contents)
1 Samuel 1 • 1 Samuel 2 • 1 Samuel 3 • 1 Samuel 4 • 1 Samuel 5
•
1 Samuel 6 • 1 Samuel 7 • 1 Samuel 8 • 1 Samuel 9 • 1 Samuel 10
•
1 Samuel 11 • 1 Samuel 12 • 1 Samuel 13 • 1 Samuel 14 • 1 Samuel 15
1 Samuel 16 • 1 Samuel 17 • 1 Samuel 18 • 1 Samuel 19 • 1 Samuel 20
1 Samuel 21 • 1 Samuel 22 • 1 Samuel 23 • 1 Samuel 24 • 1 Samuel 25
1 Samuel 26 • 1 Samuel 27 • 1 Samuel 28 • 1 Samuel 29 • 1 Samuel 30
1 Samuel 31
•
•
•
•
Introduction to 1 Samuel
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Purpose
1 Samuel Key Themes
2 Samuel Key Themes
1 Samuel Outline
2 Samuel Outline
The Setting of 1 Samuel
The Setting of 2 Samuel
Global Message of 1 Samuel
First Samuel in Redemptive History
The Folly of Superstition
God’s Grace to Israel and to the World
The Global Message of 1 Samuel for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to 1–2 Samuel
Introduction to 1–2 Samuel
Timeline
Author and Date
The author or authors of 1 and 2 Samuel are not known. These books recount
the stories of Samuel, Saul, and David. Saul’s reign began between 1050–1030
B.C. and ended in 1010. David then reigned until 971. The books were probably
written soon after the end of his reign.
Theme
The central theme of the books of Samuel is how the Lord (1) established a
dynasty (“house”) in Israel for David rather than Saul and (2) how he chose
Jerusalem as the place where David’s successor would establish the temple
(“house”) for the worship of the divine King Yahweh.
Purpose
The purpose of 1 Samuel is to highlight two major events: the establishment of
the monarchy in Israel (chs. 8–12); and the rise of David to be king after Saul
(chs. 16–31). After ruling for a while, Saul was rejected by the Lord in favor of
David (chs. 15–16), though Saul stayed on the throne until his death at Mount
Gilboa (ch. 31). Later, in 2 Samuel 7, God promises David and his house an
eternal dynasty. The book of 1 Samuel establishes the principle that obedience
to the word of God is the necessary condition for a king to be acceptable to the
God of Israel.
First and Second Samuel deal with a transitional period in the history of
ancient Israel. There is a transition of leadership first from the priest Eli to the
judge Samuel, then from the judge Samuel to the king Saul, and then from Saul
to David. Samuel thus is the link between the judgeship and the kingship in
Israel. He is the prophet God uses to anoint both Saul and David. The kingdom
of Saul was also transitional. Under Saul, Israel was more than a loose
confederation that gathered together whenever there was a common threat, but
there was no strong central rule such as existed later. The story of the rise of
David in the second half of 1 Samuel prepares for the full-scale kingship of
David in 2 Samuel.
1 Samuel Key Themes
1. God’ s kingship. God is King of the universe and always has been. No
human king can assume kingship except as a deputy of the divine King.
2. God’ s providential guidance. God providentially and individually guided
the lives of chosen people such as Hannah, Samuel, and David. Even the
life of Saul was in God’s providential care (see 1 Sam. 9:16). God’s
timing is always perfect (see 1 Samuel 9 and the end of 1 Samuel 23), for
he is the Lord of history.
3. God’ s sovereign will and power. God chooses or rejects people according
to his absolute sovereign will and purpose. He may change his way of
dealing with individuals according to his plan and purpose, but his
decision is always just and right. At the same time, he is merciful and
gracious.
Therefore, obedience to God’s word is of prime importance. Only God’s
grace allows sinful human beings to be in relationship with the holy God. Only
the God-given way of approaching him through sacrifice can prepare humans
to come closer to God. Believers can only wait on God, who will do his will
according to his own purpose. What is impossible for humans is possible for
God. This should encourage believers to put their faith in the one who is
sovereign over the entire creation.
2 Samuel Key Themes
The themes of 1 Samuel are related to the themes of 2 Samuel: the sovereign
God, who has guided David’s life, chooses David as the ruler of God’s people.
God pledges to David an eternal covenant. David thus becomes the prototype
of the future Messiah, Jesus Christ.
1. Davidic covenant. See 2 Samuel 7.
2. Messianic promise. Second Samuel 7 is a turning point in the history of
salvation. God chose David to be the beginning of an enduring dynasty,
from which the ultimate Ruler, Jesus, would come. God used David to
fulfill his eternal plan of salvation, not because he was perfect from a
human viewpoint, but because the Lord was “with him” and showed grace
to him.
1 Samuel Outline
I. The Story of Samuel (1:1–7:17)
II. Transition to the Monarchy (8:1–22)
III. The Story of Saul (9:1–15:35)
IV . The Story of Saul and David (16:1–31:13)
2 Samuel Outline
I. Story of King David (1:1–20:26)
II. Epilogue (21:1–24:25)
The Setting of 1 Samuel
c. 1050 B.C.
The book of 1 Samuel is set in Israel during the transition between the period
of the judges and the period of the monarchy. It opens with Samuel’s birth and
then describes his role as judge over Israel. When the people ask for a king, the
Lord instructs Samuel to anoint Saul as Israel’s first king.
The Setting of 2 Samuel
The Setting of 2 Samuel
c. 1000 B.C.
The book of 2 Samuel recounts David’s reign over Israel and his battles to
establish Israel as the dominant power in Syria and Palestine. David expanded
Israel’s borders from Saul’s smaller territory. By the end of his reign, David
controlled all of Israel, Edom, Moab, Ammon, Syria, and Zobah. Other
kingdoms, such as Tyre and Hamath, established treaties with him.
The Global Message of 1 Samuel
First Samuel in Redemptive History
God’s purpose in setting apart Abraham and his descendants, the Israelites,
was to bless the nations of the world. The way we see this purpose move
forward in 1 Samuel is through the beginning of the kingship in Israel.
While on one level it was an act of faithlessness when Israel clamored to
have a king like all the other nations of the world (1 Sam. 8:4–22), God
used their wayward request to begin a succession of kings that would
ultimately be fulfilled in the true and final king, Jesus himself.
In this way 1 Samuel demonstrates God’s continued care for his people,
raising up for them a king who would be Israel’s champion, representative,
and example. Saul, the first king, was outwardly impressive but failed to
trust God truly. He proved himself to be a flawed, headstrong, and
unworthy king. David, however, in spite of his profound moral failures, was
God’s choice to be the start of a dynasty that will never end. Indeed, while
this dynasty proved to produce one failed king after another, these failures
served to heighten the longing for a true king who would not fail but would
prove himself the ultimate champion, representative, and example for God’s
people.
In God’s miraculous mercy, in the fullness of time, this dynasty did
indeed bring forth a Ruler to lead God’s people in bringing blessing to all
the nations of the earth.
The Folly of Superstition
Superstition today. The book of 1 Samuel provides the most systematic
teaching in the Old Testament about the phenomenon of superstition.
Though some might define superstition narrowly as social taboos or
irrational beliefs, superstition is not limited to these things. At the heart of
superstition is simply fear of the unknown. Any attempt to manipulate an
unknown deity or the powers that supposedly control the world counts as a
form of superstition. Understood in this broader sense, it becomes evident
that superstition is still found around the world today, even among those
with a Christian background. Believers sometimes think that daily Bible
reading and prayer will bring predictable blessings, or that God may be
bargained with through giving a bigger offering, or that wearing Christian
symbols brings protection from harm. All this is superstition.
Superstition in 1 Samuel. In 1 Samuel 4–7, the story of the ark of the
covenant (which represented God’s presence; see Ex. 25:10–22)
demonstrates how a missionary God responds to superstitious people. In a
battle against the Philistines, the Israelites believe that the presence of the
ark can guarantee victory in battle: “Let us bring the ark of the covenant of
the LORD here from Shiloh, that it may come among us and save us from the
power of our enemies” (1 Sam. 4:3). But the presence of the ark among
them makes no difference. Not only is Israel defeated by the Philistines, but
two tragedies follow: “The ark of God was captured, and the two sons of
Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, died” (4:11). Here is the greatest crisis so far in
Israel’s history. The ark, which symbolized God’s presence and
accompanied Israel into the Promised Land, has been taken. And the priest’s
two sons, the future leaders of Israel, are both dead. To the Israelites, these
setbacks mean nothing less than the collapse of their nation. Their divine
leadership and their human leadership have both been lost.
God’s Grace to Israel and to the World
God’ s greater purposes. The rest of 1 Samuel 4–7 reveals, however, that
God often allows the superstitions of his people to fail so that they might
learn that he remains sovereign even in defeat. Israel has given up hope
because their false reliance on the ark has failed. But the battle over
superstition is just getting started—the Philistines will soon see how a
missionary God also defeats their superstition about the ark. They do what
victorious armies in the ancient world typically did, moving the symbol of
their enemy’s god into the temple of their own god: “Then the Philistines
took the ark of God and brought it into the house of Dagon and set it up
beside Dagon” (1 Sam. 5:2).
To the Philistines it is clear that Dagon, their god of fertility, is stronger
than the God of Israel, because Israel lost the battle. On this point the
Israelites would perhaps have agreed. But the next morning, the Philistines
wake up to find Dagon flat on his face before the ark of the Lord. The
Philistines wonder if perhaps Dagon was positioned improperly on his
throne, so they return Dagon to his place. Once more, however, they find
Dagon lying prostrate, this time with his head and hands cut off (1 Sam.
5:4).
Drawing all people to himself. Israel is defeated, but the God of Israel
certainly is not. He has allowed the ark to be taken by the Philistines
because of the superstition of the Israelites, but now the ark defeats the
superstition of the Philistines! This account shows that when God’s people
are faithless and attempt to manipulate God through their superstitions, he
may allow their superstitions to succeed before then using his power to
humble them. The humbled Philistines show more respect to the ark than
the Israelites had done: “What shall we do with the ark of the God of
Israel?” (1 Sam. 5:8; compare 4:3). God has hidden his power in Israel but
reveals his power in Philistia—the Israelites give up on their God because
superstition has led to defeat, yet due to the same superstition and its effects
in Philistia, the Philistines give up on Dagon and acknowledge the God of
Israel. Thus the superstitious world of both the Israelites and Philistines has
been turned upside down by a missionary God who is creatively drawing all
peoples to himself.
The Global Message of 1 Samuel for Today
Rejecting superstition. The God of the Bible, the one true God, is not a
fickle tribal deity. He cannot be manipulated. When God’s people are
superstitious, they show a lack of heartfelt faith in the God who orders all
things according to his infinite wisdom. We can pray and act in confidence,
not in the fear that drives superstition. Like the mobile ark in 1 Samuel 4–7,
the sovereign God of the world is not captive to any particular place or
human agenda or superstition.
God’ s wisdom through human folly. God is at work not only in victory
but also in defeat. His redemptive purposes are accomplished despite, and
even through, human weakness and sinfulness. The supreme example of
this is the cross of Christ. The world thought that it was defeating God by
nailing his Son Jesus to a Roman cross, yet in that moment God was
accomplishing his greatest victory (1 Cor. 1:18–2:16). As we confess our
sinfulness and place our trust in Jesus alone, the missionary God who has
overcome the powers of this world exchanges our sins and superstitions for
the righteousness of Christ himself (2 Cor. 5:21) and the abiding presence
of his Spirit, who never leaves us (John 14:16–17).
The Birth of Samuel