TITUS 3 [†]Remind them x to be submissive to rulers and authorities, y to be
obedient, to be ready for every good work, 2[†] z to speak evil of no one, a to
avoid quarreling, to be gentle, and b to show perfect courtesy toward all
people. 3[†]For c we ourselves were once foolish, disobedient, led astray,
slaves to various passions and pleasures, passing our days in malice and
envy, hated by others and hating one another.
4[†]But when d the goodness
and loving kindness of God our Savior appeared, 5[†]he saved us, e not
because of works done by us in righteousness, but f according to his own
mercy, by g the washing of regeneration and h renewal of the Holy Spirit,
6whom he i poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior,
7so that
j being justified by his grace we might become k heirs l according to the
hope of eternal life. 8[†]The saying is m trustworthy, and I want you to insist
on these things, so that those who have believed in God may be careful n to
devote themselves to good works. These things are excellent and profitable
for people. 9[†]But o avoid foolish p controversies, q genealogies,
dissensions, and quarrels about the law, for r they are unprofitable and
worthless. 10[†]As for a person who stirs up division, s after warning him
once and then twice, t have nothing more to do with him, 11knowing that
such a person is warped and sinful; he is self-condemned.
Final Instructions and Greetings
12[†]When I send Artemas or u Tychicus to you, do your best to come to me
v at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there. 13[†]Do your
best to speed Zenas the lawyer and w Apollos on their way; see that they
lack nothing. 14[†]And let our people learn x to devote themselves to good
works, so as to help cases of urgent need, and not y be unfruitful.
15[†]All who are with me send greetings to you. Greet those who love us
in the faith.
z Grace be with you all.
Study Notes for Titus
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:1–4 Opening. The doctrinal themes in this section
occur again in the other doctrinal sections of the letter (2:11–14; 3:3–7).
FACT
Famous liars. Paul quotes a Cretan author who admits that the people of
his own nation had a reputation for not telling the truth (1:12). In fact, the
Greeks even coined the word “Cretanize,” which meant dealing falsely
with people.
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:1 servant of God. Paul often uses “servant” (or “slave”)
to describe himself (Rom. 1:1; Gal. 1:10; Phil. 1:1) and other Christians
(Eph. 6:6; Col. 4:12; see also 2 Pet. 1:1). Typically, though, Paul refers to
himself as “servant of Christ.” This is the only place he uses “servant of
God.” This wording suggests a direct connection to Moses, David, and OT
prophets who were described as servants of God (see 2 Sam. 7:4, 8; Ps.
105:26; Jer. 7:25; Amos 3:7). This places Paul among those who have been
God’s spokesmen from the beginning. Furthermore, a slave in the first
century did not act on his own authority; he acted on his master’s authority.
This concept of received authority is expanded by the phrase apostle of
Jesus Christ (see note on Rom. 1:1). For the sake of points to the purpose
or goal of Paul’s apostleship. He labors to see people saved, coming to faith
and the knowledge of the truth (see 1 Tim. 2:4; 2 Tim. 2:25). accords with
godliness. The true gospel always produces godliness in its followers. This
introduces a serious problem with the false teachers: they did not exhibit
godly character.
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:2–3 Hope is not wishful thinking. It is confidence that
the things God has promised will occur. God never lies. It is against God’s
character and thus impossible for God to lie (see Heb. 6:18). This truth was
particularly meaningful in the Cretan context (see Titus 1:12–13 and note).
God our Savior. On God as “Savior,” see note on 2 Tim. 1:8–10. See also
Titus 2:13 and note. See also chart.
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:5–9 The Occasion: The Need for Proper Leadership.
Paul reminds Titus of the directions for ministry he had left with him. A
“virtue list” shows the sort of leadership needed for the new churches in
Crete.
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:5 The churches in Crete do not yet have elders, and there
are things that need to be put . . . into order. This suggests that these
churches are still fairly young. Titus is there as Paul’s delegate to get these
churches properly established. in every town. In all NT churches elders
(plural) govern the churches (see notes on Acts 14:23; 20:17). Here “elder”
is used interchangeably with “overseer” (Titus 1:7). The rest of the NT
shows that these two terms, as well as “pastor” (see Eph. 4:11, esv
footnote), refer to the same office (see note on 1 Tim. 3:1).
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:6 husband of one wife. See note on 1 Tim. 3:2–3. His
children are believers can also be translated “his children are faithful.”
The primary argument for translating it as “believers” is that, in the letters
to Timothy and Titus, this word almost always refers to saving faith. Those
who prefer “faithful” argue that no father can guarantee the conversion of
his children, but he can ordinarily ensure that they act in a “faithful” way.
The word “children” applies only to children living at home and still under
their father’s authority.
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:9 able to give instruction. A pastor or elder must have
the ability to teach. This includes both teaching what is right and correcting
error. The reason for this emphasis is clear from what follows (vv. 10–16).
sound doctrine. See note on 1 Tim. 1:10.
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:10–16 The Problem: False Teachers. The
description of the false teachers contrasts directly with the descriptions of
what the elders should be (vv. 5–9).
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:10 especially those of the circumcision party. The false
teachers emerged particularly from among Jewish Christians.
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:11 They must be silenced. One responsibility of church
leaders is to stop false teaching when it arises in the church. shameful gain.
These teachers are motivated by greed (compare 1 Tim. 6:5).
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:12–13 Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy
gluttons. Crete was famous in the ancient world for its immorality. a
prophet of their own. Paul does not criticize Cretan society directly. He
quotes a Cretan author and then agrees with him (this testimony is true).
Of course Paul means this as a generalization. The quotation seems to be
from Epimenides of Crete, although his writings are known only through
other authors’ quotations of him (see note on Acts 17:28).
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:14 Jewish myths. On “myths,” see note on 1 Tim. 1:4.
The specific content of these myths is unknown. The false teaching in Titus
is more directly tied to a Jewish background than the false teaching
described in 1 and 2 Timothy (see Titus 1:10).
God and Christ as “Our Savior” in Titus
“the preaching with which I have been entrusted by the command of
God our Savior” (1:3)
“so that in everything they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior”
(2:10)
“when the goodness and loving kindness of God our Savior” (3:4)
“Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus
our Savior” (1:4)
“the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ”
(2:13)
“he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our
Savior” (3:6)
TITUS—NOTE ON 1:15 To the pure, all things are pure. In light of v. 14 and
earlier teaching by Jesus (Luke 11:41) and Paul (Rom. 14:20), the issue
here seems to concern Jewish food laws.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:1–3:8 Christian Living in Contrast to the False Teachers.
Paul describes proper Christian living rooted in the gospel. This is in direct
contrast to the behavior of the false teachers (1:10–16), but it does match
what is required of true church leaders (1:5–9). This is the primary concern
of the letter: right doctrine leads to right behavior.
FACT
What is theology? Theology is the study of God. Biblical theology
attempts to make accurate statements about God based on what he has
revealed about himself in Scripture. Accurate knowledge of the Bible is
especially important in responding to the kind of false teachings that Paul
talks about in his letter to Titus.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:1–10 Some argue that the behavior commanded here is
specific to the first century context because its purpose is to avoid offense
(see note on vv. 5, 8, 10). However, v. 1 bases this behavior on “sound
doctrine” itself, not on cultural ideas.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:1 But as for you. Titus must be different than the false
teachers. He must teach the people to live in a way that accords with sound
doctrine.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:3–5 The instruction to older women and young women
is connected because part of the role of a Christian older woman is to train
the younger women. The Greek word for “train” means “give instruction in
wise behavior and good judgment.” The topics to be taught in vv. 4–5 are
very practical and focus on domestic matters. Working at home does not
prohibit working outside the home (see Prov. 31:16, 18, 24). It does indicate
that Paul expects wives to have the primary responsibility for the day-to-
day care of their homes and children.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:5, 8, 10 These verses encourage a “gospel lifestyle” that
gives unbelievers no reason to reject the gospel. This lifestyle also
highlights the gospel’s attractiveness (“adorn,” v. 10). On God as Savior (v.
10), see note on 2 Tim. 1:8–10. See also chart.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:11–14 One cannot truly claim to have received saving
grace without also accepting “training grace.” This change in lifestyle is
rooted in the atonement (v. 14) and the expectation of Christ’s return (v. 13).
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:11 Bringing salvation for all people means that
salvation has been offered to all people (including all ethnic groups), not
just to some. It does not mean that all people will be saved (see note on 1
Tim. 2:4).
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:12 Saving grace teaches its recipients to say no to sin and
yes to godliness. In the present age stresses that this godliness is to be
lived out now. It also sets up the reference to the future return of Christ in v.
13.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:13 The Greek for waiting implies eagerness. Eagerly
expecting Christ’s return is how grace trains Christians to reject sin and live
a godly life (see vv. 11–12). Our blessed hope means Christ’s second
coming, which Paul calls the appearing of . . . our great God and Savior
Jesus Christ. Paul does not refer here to two persons (God the Father and
Jesus Christ). Rather, Jesus is identified as “our great God and Savior”
(compare John 1:1; 20:28; etc.).
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:14 to redeem us from all lawlessness. This phrase in
Greek closely resembles the Greek translation of Ps. 130:8. One purpose of
Jesus’ death was to make his people holy. A people for his own possession
translates an unusual phrase with intentional echoes from the OT (see
especially Ex. 19:5; Mal. 3:17). It has the sense of “prized, treasured
possession.” These people are to be zealous for good works, so again
redemption is tied specifically to living in a godly manner.
TITUS—NOTE ON 2:15 After describing the gospel, Paul returns to giving
Titus instructions (as in vv. 1–10).
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:1–2 Paul again describes “gospel living.” This time he
emphasizes interaction with unbelievers. In general, the qualities
encouraged here are in contrast to the description of the false teachers in
1:10–16.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:2 Perfect courtesy is a good translation of an often
misunderstood word which literally means “meekness/gentleness.”
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:3–7 As in 2:11–14, Paul explains how his
encouragements to godly living (3:1–2) are based on the gospel. This gospel
statement highlights the ethical and practical changes that grace produces.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:4 Goodness and loving kindness stand in stark contrast
to the description of lost humanity in v. 3.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:5 Salvation comes by the washing of regeneration and
renewal of the Holy Spirit. Some have understood this as saying that
baptism (“the washing”) causes salvation. However, in this context human
deeds are clearly less important (not because of works) than God’s taking
the initiative in salvation (he saved us). The “washing” described here is
spiritual cleansing, which baptism outwardly symbolizes.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:8 Again note the emphasis on good works as a mark of
believers (compare 1:16; 2:14; 3:1).
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:9–11 The Problem Restated: False Teachers. Paul returns
to the problem of false teachers. Thus, the discussion of gospel living (2:1–
3:8) is followed by discussion of those who claim to believe this gospel but
fail to live it out.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:9 But. The reference to the usefulness of correct doctrine
in v. 8 sets up the contrast with the worthless nature of the false teaching. It
is foolish and unprofitable.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:10–11 have nothing more to do with him. The NT is
clear about seeking the repentance of such sinners. It is equally clear that
refusal to change eventually shows that one is not in Christ and therefore
must be excluded from the Christian community (see also 1 Corinthians 5).
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:12–15 Closing Encouragement. Paul closes with
travel plans and greetings. Even these items echo the letter’s main points.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:12 do your best to come to me. Paul did not expect
Titus to stay in Crete permanently. Artemas is not mentioned elsewhere in
the NT. Tychicus is mentioned as an Asian who accompanied Paul on his
third journey (Acts 20:4). In Eph. 6:21 and Col. 4:7 he is referred to as a
“beloved brother and faithful minister” (see also 2 Tim. 4:12). Nicopolis
was a port city in Epirus. It was located on the west coast of the Greek
peninsula, 178 miles (286 km) northwest of Athens.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:13–14 Speed . . . on their way; see that they lack
nothing shows Paul’s concern that fellow missionaries be adequately
supported. Zenas is not mentioned elsewhere in the NT. Apollos is
undoubtedly the popular speaker mentioned in Acts and 1 Corinthians (Acts
18:24; 19:1; 1 Cor. 3:6; etc.).
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:14 One last time Paul stresses good works.
TITUS—NOTE ON 3:15 Grace be with you all. Paul’s letter, though written
primarily to Titus, will be read to the entire congregation.
P h i l e m o n
(return to table of contents)
Philemon
Introduction to Philemon
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
Global Message of Philemon
Philemon and Redemptive History
The Global Implications of Philemon
The Global Message of Philemon for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Philemon
Introduction to Philemon
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
This is a personal letter from the apostle Paul to Philemon, a wealthy
Christian from Colossae. It was also intended for reading to the entire
church that met in Philemon’s home. It was probably written c. A.D. 62,
while Paul was in prison following his voyage to Rome (Acts 27–28).
Theme
The theme of Paul’s letter is the power of the gospel to transform individual
lives (v. 11) and human relationships (v. 16). Onesimus had experienced
that transforming power in his life (“formerly he was useless” but “now he
is indeed useful”; v. 11). Paul therefore urged his friend Philemon to form a
new relationship with Onesimus, his runaway slave.
Purpose
Apparently, during Paul’s three-year ministry in Ephesus (A.D. 52–55),
Philemon heard the gospel and was saved. He began serving Christ in the
Colossian community. He opened his home for a group of Christians to
meet there regularly.
At some point, Onesimus, one of Philemon’s bondservants, fled to Rome.
Before he left, he possibly had stolen money or property from Philemon.
While in Rome, Onesimus came into contact with Paul and became a
Christian. As he grew in Christ, he was a great help to Paul during Paul’s
imprisonment.
As much as Paul would like to have retained the services of Onesimus,
Paul knew that Onesimus’s wrongdoing against his master Philemon needed
to be addressed. He wrote this letter urging Philemon to appreciate the
transformation that had occurred in Onesimus. Paul asked Philemon to
receive Onesimus back not merely as a bondservant but as a “beloved
brother” (v. 16).
It is difficult to know if Paul sought Onesimus’s full freedom. It is clear,
however, that he was seeking a transformed relationship between
bondservant and master. This new relationship would defy all of the
ingrained status distinctions of the surrounding Greek and Roman culture. It
would have been difficult for the kind of servitude practiced by Rome to
survive in the atmosphere of Christian love exemplified by the letter. On
first-century forms of servitude, see the esv Preface.
This simplified letter is in the form of letters that people ordinarily write,
in contrast to the more stylized and literary five-part format of most NT
epistles. The letter is a masterpiece of persuasion as Paul seeks a favorable
reception for the returning bondservant, where normally one might expect
the master to be vindictive.
Paul’s strategy follows that prescribed by Greek and Roman rhetoricians
of the day: begin by building rapport and goodwill with an audience (vv. 4–
10), then lay out the facts in a way that will convince the mind or intellect
(vv. 11–19), and finally appeal to the emotions of the audience (vv. 20–21).
Key Themes
1. Reconciliation is the theme of this letter. Onesimus is reconciled to
God. He is in the process of being reconciled to a fellow believer.
2. The basis for Paul’s appeal to Philemon is the supreme Christian virtue
of love. Paul praises Philemon for the love he has shown not just to
him but to all the believers in that area.
Outline
I. Greetings (vv. 1–3)
II. Thanksgiving and Prayer (vv. 4–7)
III. Paul’s Appeal to Philemon for Onesimus (vv. 8–20)
IV . Personal Remarks and Greetings (vv. 21–25)
The Global Message of Philemon
The heart of Paul’s letter to Philemon is the fellowship that comes from
reconciliation. Philemon the slave-owner and Onesimus the runaway slave
(or bondservant) had both been reconciled to God through Paul’s ministry.
Paul’s letter to Philemon is a plea that the slave-owner and the slave be
reconciled with one another. In light of their restored relationships with
God, fellowship should and must flourish between the two of them.
In dealing with fellowship and reconciliation in the context of the
socially charged issue of slavery, this brief letter has much to say to the
global church today.
Philemon and Redemptive History
There is not the space in this brief letter for Paul to say much specifically
about the Bible’s story line of creation, fall, redemption, and
consummation. Even so, Paul clearly is thinking about the coming of Christ
and the saving purposes of God as he writes. Paul greets Philemon with a
familiar and theologically rich greeting: “Grace to you and peace from God
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ” (Philem. 3). “Christ” here as
elsewhere refers to the Messiah, the anointed coming king who would
restore the people of God (see also vv. 6, 8, 9, 20, 23, 25). The central hope
of the Old Testament is therefore brought to mind right from the start of
Philemon. Paul then appeals to Philemon throughout the rest of letter by
employing language and ideas that are given their significance from the Old
Testament and its unfolding story of redemption—words such as “saints”
(vv. 5, 7), “gospel” (v. 13), and “grace” (vv. 3, 25).
In short, Paul addresses Philemon against the backdrop of the history of
redemption that has come to its climax in the gospel of grace manifested in
the coming of Christ.
The Global Implications of Philemon
Because Paul’s letter to Philemon deals with the issue of slavery, it is at
once both exceedingly relevant for the contemporary global church as well
as requiring delicacy and care in applying its teachings. Several
implications emerge.
Fellowship among Christians. Through Paul’s ministry, Philemon has
come to know Christ (Philem. 19), as has his former bondservant Onesimus
(v. 10). Consequently, Philemon the slave-owner and Onesimus the
slave/bondservant are now brothers in Christ. Onesimus had apparently
stolen money and run away; nonetheless, Paul now pleads with Philemon to
receive Onesimus “no longer as a bondservant but more than a bondservant,
as a beloved brother” (v. 16). Philemon’s most important relationship to
Onesimus was no longer as owner but as brother. The warmth and
tenderness with which Paul writes to Philemon is to be extended to
Onesimus. Philemon is to welcome him back, and forgive him, and let Paul
pay back the equivalent of the stolen money. This should remind the church
today that the fundamental relationship between believers is that of forgiven
sinners who are now brothers and sisters “in the Lord” (v. 16). Economic
status, wealth, ethnicity, family background, and other social distinctions
are all secondary to our new identity in Christ as God’s sons and daughters.
The gospel and the social order. Bondservitude in the ancient world
ought not to be equated with any of the forms of slavery found in the
modern world. In Colossae, where Philemon lived, perhaps one third of the
people were bondservants. Bondservants, while belonging to their owner,
had a status deriving from this relationship. Indeed, for many bondservants
in those days, freedom would have been a disadvantage rather than an
advantage—similar to the situation of a person today who loses his or her
job. Moreover, while treatment of bondservants varied widely, some
bondservants were entrusted by their owners with significant
responsibilities. Social advancement was possible; for example, the
governor Felix, mentioned in Acts 24, was a former bondservant. We might
also note that, in New Testament times, bondservants did not come from
just one particular ethnic group. People of all races might end up in this
form of servitude.
Unity in mind and action. Philemon is a fairly private letter from one
individual to another. Yet it is addressed not only to Philemon but also to
Apphia, Archippus, and, indeed, the whole church that met in Philemon’s
home (Philem. 2). And while the verbs are singular throughout most of the
letter, toward the end Paul begins to address the church more widely: “your
prayers” (v. 22) and “your spirit” (v. 25) are plural. In all this we see that
believers in Christ are bound to one another in mind and action. While
Philemon’s response to Paul’s letter would be his own, the entire church
that met in his home would be represented by that decision. Members of the
Christian church never act strictly “on their own”; in all things they
represent Christ and Christ’s body, the organism of fellow believers that we
call the church.
The Global Message of Philemon for Today
It is unclear whether Paul was advocating that Philemon should free
Onesimus from servitude. He may have been suggesting this when he
expressed his confidence that Philemon would do “even more than I say”
for Onesimus (Philem. 21). Whatever the case, it is clear that Paul is
appealing to Philemon’s heart and seeking an act of willing love on
Philemon’s part. Paul does not command that Philemon cooperate, despite
the fact that Paul has the right to do so (vv. 8, 19). The apostle is therefore
going beneath the letter of the law to the spirit of the law. In so doing he
reminds believers around the world today that it is freely chosen love, not
forced demand, that transforms hearts.
The deepest truth that emerges from Philemon is that what matters most
amid all our varying social circumstances is the new realm into which
believers have been swept up. By the gracious saving initiative of God,
believers have been granted a new citizenship (note Phil. 3:20). Our union
with Christ, and thus with all those who are also in him, transcends all
cultural and social barriers. We must work diligently to end all modern
forms of unjust social institutions such as slavery. But we do so in the
knowledge that even the best social systems cannot deliver true peace if
Christ is not present, and even the worst social systems cannot take away
our joy, if Christ is present.
Greeting