ZECHARIAH 10 [†] Ask rain b from the LORD
in the season of c the spring rain,
from the LORD d who makes the storm clouds,
and e he will give them showers of rain,
to everyone the vegetation in the field.
2[†] For f the household gods g utter nonsense,
and the diviners see lies;
h they tell false dreams
and give empty consolation.
Therefore i the people wander like sheep;
they are afflicted for lack of a shepherd.
3 j “My anger is hot against the shepherds,
and k I will punish the leaders; [1]
for l the LORD of hosts cares for his flock, the house of Judah,
and will make them like his majestic steed in battle.
4[†] From him shall come m the cornerstone,
from him n the tent peg,
from him the battle bow,
from him every ruler— o all of them together.
5 They shall be like mighty men in battle,
p trampling the foe in the mud of the streets;
they shall fight because the LORD is with them,
and they shall put to shame q the riders on horses.
6[†] r “I will strengthen the house of Judah,
and s I will save the house of Joseph.
t I will bring them back u because I have compassion on them,
and they shall be as though I had not rejected them,
for v I am the LORD their God and I will answer them.
7[†] Then Ephraim shall become like a mighty warrior,
and w their hearts shall be glad as with wine.
Their children shall see it and be glad;
their hearts shall rejoice in the LORD.
8[†] x “I will whistle for them and y gather them in,
for I have redeemed them,
and z they shall be as many as they were before.
9 a Though I scattered them among the nations,
yet in far countries b they shall remember me,
and with their children they shall live and return.
10 c I will bring them home from the land of Egypt,
and gather them from Assyria,
and d I will bring them to the land of Gilead and to Lebanon,
e till there is no room for them.
11 f He shall pass through the sea of troubles
and strike down the waves of the sea,
g and all the depths of the Nile shall be dried up.
The pride of Assyria shall be laid low,
and h the scepter of Egypt shall depart.
12 i I will make them strong in the LORD,
and j they shall walk in his name,”
declares the LORD.
The Flock Doomed to Slaughter