ZECHARIAH 12 [†] i The oracle of the word of the LORD concerning Israel:
Thus declares the LORD, j who stretched out the heavens and k founded the
earth and j formed the spirit of man within him: 2[†]“Behold, I am about to
make Jerusalem l a cup of staggering to m all the surrounding peoples. The
siege of Jerusalem n will also be against Judah. 3[†] o On that day I will
make Jerusalem a heavy stone for all the peoples. p All who lift it will
surely hurt themselves. And m all the nations of the earth will gather against
it. 4[†] o On that day, declares the LORD, q I will strike every horse r with
panic, and its rider r with madness. But for the sake of the house of Judah I
will keep my eyes open, when I strike every horse of the peoples r with
blindness. 5[†]Then the clans of Judah shall say to themselves, ‘The
inhabitants of Jerusalem have strength through the LORD of hosts, their
God.’
6
o “On that day I will make the clans of Judah s like a blazing pot in the
midst of wood, like a flaming torch among sheaves. And t they shall devour
to the right and to the left all the surrounding peoples, while u Jerusalem
shall again be inhabited in its place, in Jerusalem.
7[†]“And the LORD will give salvation to the tents of Judah first, that the
glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem
may not surpass that of Judah. 8[†] o On that day v the LORD will protect the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that w the feeblest among them on that day
shall be like David, and the house of David shall be like God, x like the
angel of the LORD, going before them. 9[†] o And on that day y I will seek to
destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
Him Whom They Have Pierced
10[†]“And z I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem a spirit of grace and z pleas for mercy, so that, a when they look
on me, on him whom they have pierced, b they shall mourn for him, c as
one mourns for an only child, and weep bitterly over him, as one weeps
over a firstborn. 11
o On that day d the mourning in Jerusalem will be as
great e as the mourning for Hadad-rimmon in the plain of Megiddo. 12The
land shall mourn, f each family [1] by itself: the family of the house of David
by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family of the house of g Nathan
by itself, and their wives by themselves; 13the family of the house of Levi
by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family of h the Shimeites by
itself, and their wives by themselves; 14and all the families that are left,
each by itself, and their wives by themselves.