ZECHARIAH 14 [†]Behold, x a day is coming for the LORD, when the spoil
taken from you will be divided in your midst. 2For y I will gather all the
nations against Jerusalem to battle, and z the city shall be taken a and the
houses plundered b and the women raped. c Half of the city shall go out into
exile, but the rest of the people shall not be cut off from the city.
3
d Then the
LORD will go out and fight against those nations as when he fights on a day
of battle. 4[†] e On that day his feet shall stand f on g the Mount of Olives
that lies before Jerusalem on the east, and g the Mount of Olives shall be
split in two from east to west by h a very wide valley, so that one half of the
Mount shall move northward, and the other half southward. 5[†]And you
shall flee to the valley of my mountains, for the valley of the mountains
shall reach to Azal. And you shall flee as you fled from i the earthquake in
the days of Uzziah king of Judah. Then the LORD my God will come, and all
the holy ones with him.
6[†] e On that day j there shall be j no light, cold, or frost. [1] 7[†] k And
there shall be a unique [2] day, l which is known to the LORD, neither day nor
night, but m at evening time there shall be light.
8[†] e On that day n living waters shall flow out from Jerusalem, half of
them to o the eastern sea [3] and half of them to o the western sea. [4] p It
shall continue in summer as in winter.
9[†]And q the LORD will be king over all the earth. r On that day the
LORD will be s one and t his name one.
10[†] u The whole land shall be turned into a plain from v Geba to
w Rimmon south of Jerusalem. But x Jerusalem shall remain aloft y on its
site from z the Gate of Benjamin to the place of the former gate, to a the
Corner Gate, and from b the Tower of Hananel to the king’s winepresses.
11[†]And it shall be inhabited, for c there shall never again be a decree of
utter destruction. [5] d Jerusalem shall dwell in security.
12[†]And this shall be e the plague with which the LORD will strike all the
peoples that wage war against Jerusalem: their flesh will rot while they are
still standing on their feet, their eyes will rot in their sockets, and their
tongues will rot in their mouths.
13And f on that day a great panic from the LORD shall fall on them, so that
g each will seize the hand of another, and the hand of the one will be raised
against the hand of the other.
14Even h Judah will fight at Jerusalem. And
i the wealth of all the surrounding nations shall be collected, gold, silver,
and garments in great abundance. 15And j a plague like this plague shall fall
on the horses, the mules, the camels, the donkeys, and whatever beasts may
be in those camps.
16[†]Then everyone who survives of all the nations that have come
against Jerusalem k shall go up year after year to worship l the King, the
LORD of hosts, and m to keep n the Feast of Booths. 17[†]And if o any of the
families of the earth do not go up to Jerusalem to worship l the King, the
LORD of hosts, p there will be no rain on them. 18And if the family of Egypt
does not go up and present themselves, then on them there shall be no
rain; [6] there shall be j the plague with which the LORD afflicts the nations
that do not go up m to keep the Feast of Booths. 19This shall be the
punishment to Egypt and the punishment to all the nations that do not go up
m to keep the Feast of Booths.
20[†]And q on that day there shall be inscribed on the bells of the horses,
r “Holy to the LORD.” And the pots in the house of the LORD shall be as the
bowls before the altar.
21[†]And every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be
r holy to the LORD of hosts, so that all who sacrifice may come and take of
them and boil the meat of the sacrifice in them. And s there shall no longer
be t a trader [7] in the house of the LORD of hosts q on that day.
Study Notes for Zechariah
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:1–8:23 Oracles and Visions. Zechariah’s
sequence of visions in 1:7–6:15 is interrupted by an oracle of restoration
(2:6–13) and an oracle identifying the high priest Joshua as the key agent
of renewal (6:9–15). The visions demonstrate that God affects all
creation, including humanity. The trauma and triumph of Zion’s
restoration begin and end the section (1:1–6; 8:1–23).
FACT
Zechariah in the NT. Several NT writers quote or allude to the book of
Zechariah. One estimate is that 54 passages from Zechariah occur in 67
different places in the NT. Many of these are in Revelation.
1:1–6 Introduction: Return to Me and I Will Return to You. After the exile,
God invites his people to renew their commitment to him.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:1 The second year of Darius is 520 B.C., a stable
time in the Persian Empire. Zechariah’s name means “Yahweh
remembered.”
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:6 The people’s forefathers ignored the Lord’s
prophets and were judged. Though the prophets themselves died, the
words and statutes of the Lord that they spoke brought judgment. Now
their words bore fruit in the new generation’s response. They repented and
confessed the justice of the Lord’s judgments.
1:7–6:15 Eight Night Visions and a Sign-act. The eight visions that follow
were all received in a single night shortly before the new year, a date often
associated in the ancient Near East with temple building.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:7–17 In his first vision, Zechariah sees horsemen,
who report to God the condition of the earth and prompt the angel of the
Lord to intercede for Jerusalem.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:10–11 The horsemen whom the LORD has sent to
patrol the earth are God’s angelic forces sent to gather accurate
information for him.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:12 For the nations to be at rest while God’s people
are not is a reversal of the proper order. The angel of the LORD, God’s
personal representative, therefore asks the Lord to end the seventy years of
judgment.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:13–14 gracious and comforting words. The
Lord’s response is positive, and Zechariah is ordered to spread the good
news. The Lord’s covenantal jealousy toward Jerusalem and Zion has
caused him to act in their favor. He will now judge the nations he
previously used to judge his people for their sin (v. 2).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:17 Since his people returned to him (v. 6), the Lord
returns to dwell with them. The temple (“my house,” v. 16) will be rebuilt
and the covenantal blessing of prosperity will flow out from it. As always
in the Bible, “prosperity” is defined by God’s will, not by human desires.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 1:18–21 The second vision describes four horns.
“Four” symbolizes all the world powers responsible for exiling Judah,
Israel, and Jerusalem. These nations had scattered God’s people for their
sins, just as the covenant curse of Lev. 26:33 had warned. Those who fought
against Judah will now be brought down by four craftsmen, another group
of nations. The Abrahamic covenant promise to curse those who dishonor
Abraham and his offspring (Gen. 12:3) is still in force.
FACT
The number four in Scripture is often associated with creation or
completeness. There are four different directions of the compass, four
elements, four seasons of the year, and four times of day (morning, noon,
evening, and midnight). In 1:18, four represents all of the world powers
responsible for the scattering of Judah. However, the Lord, who is
sovereign over his creation, will care for his people and punish their
oppressors.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:1–13 In his third vision Zechariah anticipates a
renewed Jerusalem, so full of people that it spreads beyond its walls. It will
attract those Jews who remain in exile, as well as many Gentiles.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:1 The man with a measuring line in his hand
calls attention to the size of the restored city, which contrasts with its
present unimpressive state.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:5 Jerusalem’s increased population will require that
it be “without walls” (v. 4). The Lord himself will provide a protective wall
of fire around it, however, like the cherubim and flaming sword that
protected the garden of Eden (Gen. 3:24). God’s glory will return to inhabit
the entire city (see Ezekiel 43).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:6–7 Flee from the land of the north. God’s glory
will return to Jerusalem and his judgment will fall on their former rulers
(1:18–20). Thus, those still in exile in Babylon should escape and return to
Zion, the home of the temple.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:8 after his glory sent me. The Lord sent Zechariah
to declare that judgment will come on those who plundered his people, the
apple of his eye, that is, the “heart” of the eye, the most valued part.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:9 The Lord will shake his hand over Judah’s
enemies, signaling for them to be destroyed by their former slaves (compare
Isa. 13:2).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:10 Sing and rejoice. The Lord’s dramatic return to
his rebuilt house is cause for praise for those who have returned to Judah
(see Ps. 35:27).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:11 The nations too will join themselves to (enter
into covenant with) the LORD in that day (see Isa. 56:3–5). Jews and
Gentiles will join together in one nation, my people, with the Lord dwelling
in their midst (compare Eph. 2:13–16).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 2:12 Though the nations will come to worship the
Lord, Judah and Jerusalem will still be his chosen portion.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 3:1 The fourth vision (vv. 1–10) takes place in a
heavenly courtroom, where the angel of the LORD sits as judge. Joshua the
high priest, one of the leaders of the returned exiles (Hag. 1:1), is the
defendant. Satan (that is, “the Accuser” or “the Adversary”) is the
prosecutor.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 3:3 Satan has a very strong case. Joshua is clothed
with filthy garments soiled with excrement, which defiles him. This poses
a serious problem for the people, since it was through Joshua the high priest
that their own impurity was to be removed on the Day of Atonement (see
Lev. 16:1–34). But the Lord rejects Satan’s charges. The Lord’s election of
Jerusalem, and Joshua’s position as one “plucked from the fire” (that is,
brought safely back from the exile; Zech. 3:2), means that Joshua is not
guilty.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 3:4 The Lord commands his servants to remove the
filthy garments. This removes Joshua’s sin. God also orders that Joshua be
clothed in pure vestments, garments suitable to wear in the presence of the
King of kings. These garments represent a new righteousness given to
Joshua.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 3:5 Zechariah also requests a clean turban for
Joshua’s head, which symbolizes glory and royalty. Joshua’s reclothing in
the presence of the angel of the LORD shows God’s gracious acceptance of
him and the people he represents.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 3:7 The Lord commands Joshua to walk in my ways
and keep my charge. If he does so, he will also rule my house and have
charge of my courts. Thus, temple worship will not be corrupted by
idolatry (compare Ezek. 44:23–24). The Lord will not be silent or distant
from his people any longer.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 3:8–9 Joshua and his friends, the priestly class,
were men who are a sign: their very existence after the exile showed God’s
commitment to bless his people. Ultimately, God will bless them by sending
my servant the Branch. This servant will remove the iniquity of this
land. The stone was probably similar to the one on Aaron’s turban. It was
engraved with the words “Holy to the LORD,” which enabled Aaron to bear
the people’s sin before the Lord (Ex. 28:36–38).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 3:10 The coming Branch will remove the “iniquity of
this land” (v. 9). Thus, he will restore fruitfulness and peace in the land. As
during Solomon’s empire, each man will invite his neighbor to come
under his vine and under his fig tree (compare 1 Kings 4:25; Mic. 4:4).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 4:1–14 The fifth vision consists of a solid gold
lampstand flanked by two olive trees (v. 3). A “lampstand” is almost
always a ritual object, especially one made of gold (see Ex. 25:31–40).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 4:2 The lampstand supported a bowl, which was a
container for the oil. Arranged around the bowl were seven lamps, each of
which had seven lips (that is, “spouts”). This would provide a lot of light.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 4:6 God now addresses Zerubbabel, the governor.
Along with Joshua the high priest, Zerubbabel had been put in charge of
rebuilding the temple (Ezra 5:2; Hag. 1:1). God states that the obstacles to
the rebuilding will be overcome only by an outpouring of God’s Spirit.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 4:7 With assurance of God’s help, the great
mountain of difficulties that stands in the way of rebuilding will be reduced
to a plain in front of Zerubbabel (compare Isa. 40:4).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 4:10b The seven lamps (v. 2) are the eyes of the
LORD. They represent his watchfulness over the whole earth, which results
in blessing for his faithful people (compare 2 Chron. 16:9).
Zechariah’ s Visions
Vision Passage Content Summary
1 1:7–17
2 1:18–21
3 2:1–13 Vision of horsemen who “patrol the earth”
and report the condition of the earth; the
Lord promises to build his house in
Jerusalem
Vision of four horns and four craftsmen:
the horns have scattered Judah, Israel, and
Jerusalem, and the craftsmen come to
terrify and cast down the horns
Vision of a man with a measuring line in
his hand who comes to measure Jerusalem
Zechariah’s Question(s)
to the Messenger
What are these, my lord?
(v. 9)
What are these? (v. 19)
What are these coming to
do? (v. 21)
Where are you going? (v.
2)
Promise/Outcome
The Lord is jealous for Jerusalem and
promises that his house will be built there
and that the Lord’s cities will overflow
with prosperity
The craftsmen will cast down those who
have oppressed Judah, Israel, and
Jerusalem
Jerusalem will be inhabited, and the Lord
will be in the midst of his people
4 3:1–10
5 4:1–14 Vision of Joshua the high priest and the
removal of his iniquity as the
representative of the people
Vision of a lampstand and two olive trees
What are these, my lord?
(v. 4) What are these two
olive trees . . . ? (v. 11)
6 5:1–4 Vision of a flying scroll
7 5:5–11 Vision of a woman in the basket (ephah),
later carried away by two women
8 6:1–8 Vision of four chariots pulled by strong
horses: red, black, white, dappled
What is it? (v. 6) Where
are they taking the
basket? (v. 10)
What are these, my lord?
(v. 4)
Joshua the priest will rule the Lord’s house
and courts, and the coming of “my servant
the Branch” is promised
The rebuilding of the temple is charged to
Zerubbabel and Joshua and will occur by
the power of the Lord
Covenant curses will come upon the
covenant breaker, e.g., the one who steals
and the one who swears falsely
“Wickedness”
—symbolized by the
presence of the woman—will be removed
to Babylon (Shinar)
The chariots and horses go north (black
and white) and south (dappled) to “patrol
the earth”
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 4:14 The two olive trees are the two anointed ones
(see esv footnote). This “new oil” represents the fertility that flows from
God’s blessing (compare Hag. 1:11). The trees produce unlimited amounts
of oil for the lampstand. They stand by the Lord of the whole earth as
members of his heavenly court. Most interpreters think these anointed ones
represent Zerubbabel and Joshua.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 5:1–4 The sixth vision is of a gigantic scroll, 30 by
15 feet (9 by 4.5 m), flying in midair. The scroll is a covenant document,
like the tablets Moses received from the Lord in Ex. 32:15. Its task is to
bring the covenant curses to bear on covenant breakers. It uses everyone
who steals and everyone who swears falsely as representative examples
(Zech. 5:3). All covenant breakers will be cleaned out from the community.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 5:5–11 The seventh vision is closely linked to the
sixth. It adds exile to the threat of destruction.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 5:6–7 The prophet saw a basket holding about three-
fifths of a bushel. Inside this small container was their iniquity in all the
land, personified as a woman. She was trapped in the basket by a circular
leaden cover weighing roughly 75 pounds (34 kg).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 5:8 The vision includes the removal of all
wickedness from the land (see 3:9). Wickedness is under God’s power and
authority: the angel thrust the woman back into the basket, and thrust
down the leaden weight on its opening, not allowing her to escape.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 5:11 The basket of wickedness, lifted up by the two
women (v. 9), is to be taken to a new location in the land of Shinar
(Babylon). There a house, or temple, will be built for it. All idolaters will be
removed and will never again trouble God’s people.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:1–8 Zechariah’s eighth vision begins with four
chariots with horses of different colors (vv. 1–3). The chariots go out from
between two mountains . . . of bronze. These four chariots, whose number
represents completeness, are pulled by strong horses. God’s army is on the
move.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:5 The angel explains that the chariots represent the
four winds of heaven. Nowhere in the world is outside their reach. The
Hebrew word for “wind” is the same as that for “spirit,” so these winds also
represent God’s power at work in the world (compare 5:9).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:6 The “chariots” go in different directions: to
Babylon, Assyria, and Persia in the north country and to Egypt in the
south country.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:7 The strong horses with their chariots move at
God’s command to patrol the earth. They exercise God’s sovereign rule
over the whole world.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:8 Victory is easily accomplished. God’s Spirit is
set . . . at rest in the north country, the former home of his enemies. This
indicates the full and final defeat of those who oppose God (compare Deut.
12:10–12).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:9–15 This oracle describes a sign-act that looks
forward to the successful rebuilding of the temple.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:11 Joshua, the high priest, is to be crowned with a
crown of silver and gold. The precious metals are provided by those “who
have arrived from Babylon” (v. 10), which emphasizes the exiles’ place in
the community’s future.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:12 Joshua is to be crowned as a symbol of the
reality to come. the Branch. See Jer. 33:15. Zechariah repeats Jeremiah’s
promise of a king who will build the temple of the LORD.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:13 This king will sit on his throne, with a priest
beside him on another throne. Between them both there will be a counsel
of peace. They will work together in harmony.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 6:14 The oracle ends with named exiles. The crown
will be stored in the temple of the LORD as a reminder and as an
assurance of God’s determination to act in gracious sovereignty, as
described.
7:1–8:23 From Fasts to Feasts. This section mentions fasts that
commemorate the destruction of Jerusalem, which will be transformed into
feasts celebrating its renewal. The renewal gives the people another chance
to exhibit a society of justice and love, and to be the means by which light
comes to all the world.
FACT
Eight visions. The book of Zechariah has two major sections: chs. 1–8
and chs. 9–14. The first section contains eight visions that describe what
God plans to do. Many of the symbols and images in these visions also
appear in Revelation.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 7:1–14 Like the prophets before him, Zechariah
emphasizes that religious observance without obedience and justice is
empty.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 7:1 The ninth month of the fourth year of King
Darius is December 518 B.C., two years after Zechariah’s earlier prophecies.
The temple work has not yet been completed.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 7:2–3 The weeping and fasting described here were
rituals intended to show repentance in the hope of gaining help from the
Lord (see 2 Sam. 12:21–22). Now that the temple was being rebuilt, it was
natural to question whether this ritual was still needed. The fifth month
was the month in which Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed the Jerusalem
temple nearly 70 years earlier.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 7:7 The South is the area to the south of Jerusalem,
around Beersheba. The lowland is to the west of Jerusalem. Though the
original question reflected a ritual concern, the Lord’s response asks a
deeper question: “When you fasted and mourned, was it really out of a
concern over the loss of my favor?” If they have simply been fasting for
selfish reasons, then they have not learned the lesson that the temple’s
destruction was intended to teach. Such fasting was a waste of time.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 7:9–10 The test of true repentance is a life of
obedience to God. Obedience includes giving true judgments that show
kindness and mercy to the widow and fatherless, the sojourner and the
poor.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 7:12 The law and the words of the former
prophets were the two means God used to communicate his will to his
people. Yet earlier generations “refused to pay attention” (v. 11), thus
causing his anger (1:2).
FACT
Widows, fatherless children, sojourners, and the poor were vulnerable
members of society (7:10). Treating them justly and kindly matters very
much to the Lord, and he will punish those who mistreat them (see Ex.
22:21–24; Deut. 10:18–19).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 7:14 The Lord’s judgment came upon his people like
a whirlwind. It scattered them among nations that they had not known
and made them as vulnerable as the people they had oppressed.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:1–23 God is renewing his presence with his people.
He is reaffirming his purpose to bless the nations through them.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:3 The somber word of judgment on the former
generation is not the end of the story. God has returned to Zion and will
dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. In the days ahead, Jerusalem will become
a faithful city (compare Isa. 1:26) and Zion will again be the holy
mountain.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:4 Old and young, male and female are portrayed as
enjoying their new home. This ideal picture implies peace and plenty for
everyone. It also contrasts dramatically with the slave labor and poverty
that had marked Jerusalem in the recent past.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:6 Such a transformation may seem a marvelous
miracle to Zechariah’s hearers, but it is the sort of miracle that the Creator
God does routinely (should it also be marvelous in my sight?).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:7 The Lord uses opposite extremes to emphasize
the completeness of his salvation. He will save his people from the east
country and the west country and thus from everywhere in between.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:8 When the Lord returns to Jerusalem, he will
cause his covenant people to live together in faithfulness and in
righteousness. The covenant promise and they shall be my people, and I
will be their God also occurs in Jer. 31:33 and Ezek. 37:27.
ZECHARIAH
Zechariah was both a priest and a prophet. He was a member of a
prominent family who returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel. Like
Haggai, who ministered during the same time, Zechariah spoke about the
need to rebuild the temple. He reassured Judah that if they would heed
the words of the prophets and turn to the Lord, God would bless his
people for their faithfulness. God would trouble the nations who were
enjoying rest and grant rest to his troubled people, making Jerusalem
once again the center of the world. Zechariah also prophesied about the
coming of the Messiah. Matthew, Mark, John, Ephesians, and Revelation
are among the NT books that quote Zechariah, recognizing Jesus as the
fulfillment of his prophecies. (Zechariah 8:1–8)
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:12–13 With the temple reestablished, the Lord’s
attitude toward his people changes. The temple’s reconstruction results in a
sowing of peace, which is the blessings of agricultural prosperity and
national security promised in Lev. 26:4. The remnant of this people from
both the house of Judah and house of Israel will receive the peace that
unfaithful Israel never had. They will be a blessing to the nations, fulfilling
the Lord’s purpose for them (Gen. 12:2).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:15 good. The Lord’s commitment to bless this new
generation should free them from fear. It should motivate them to a new
obedience characterized by truth, justice, and grace.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:19 Formerly, the people fasted in the fourth
month, when their enemies had entered Jerusalem (2 Kings 25:3–4; Jer.
39:2; 52:6–7); in the fifth, when the city fell (Jer. 52:12–15); in the
seventh, when Gedaliah was assassinated (2 Kings 25:25); and in the tenth,
when the attack on the city had first begun (2 Kings 25:1). In the future,
these fast days will become feast days. They will be seasons of joy and
gladness celebrating the salvation and transformation that the Lord
accomplished for them.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:20–22 This blessing extends beyond Israel to
include the Gentiles: Many peoples and strong nations shall come.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 8:23 Ten men represents a complete group from the
nations of every tongue who come to Jerusalem because they recognize
that God is with his people. This prophecy was fulfilled on the day of
Pentecost (Acts 2).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:1–14:21 The Return of the King. The reference to
the surrounding nations in 8:20–23 and 9:1–8 links the book’s main parts
(chs. 1–8 and chs. 9–14). In the book’s second half, two groups of oracles
are introduced as the “oracle of the word of the LORD” (9:1; 12:1). The twin
themes of the purity of God’s people and the fidelity of their leaders—often
termed “shepherds”—run throughout these oracles. The community and its
leaders suffer opposition and difficulty. The “return of the king” (9:9) marks
the triumph of God’s purposes and the restoration of God’s people. It also
marks the salvation of people from many nations (14:9, 16; compare 8:20–
23).
9:1–11:17 The First Oracle: Leaders and Their People. Judgment on
Jerusalem’s neighbors contributes to its security (9:1–8), but the arrival of a
saving king completes it (9:9–17). While this remains the community’s only
hope, it still must recover from destructive leaders (10:1–12) who
themselves come under judgment (11:1–17).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:1–17 Zechariah tells Judah that its current
circumstances are temporary. God will judge their oppressors. He will also
send the promised king, who will rule Israel and the nations.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:1–8 As in 1:12, the issue is the nations that are
wrongfully at rest, and that will now be subject to the Lord’s judgment.
Despite all its natural resources, this whole region will experience the fiery
judgment of God that will leave it desolate. Yet even from the destruction of
those nations, a remnant (9:7) will emerge who will attach themselves to
the Lord and become part of his people (see 8:22–23). Thus the Lord will
eliminate any future threats to the peace and safety of his house (9:8) and
his people.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:9 This campaign against Israel’s enemies ends in
the triumphal entry of Israel’s king into Jerusalem. He is described as
“righteous,” like the ideal ruler of Psalm 72. He will secure their
“salvation” by guaranteeing God’s blessing. He is also humble (compare
Deut. 17:18–20), and he comes riding on a donkey. A warrior would ride a
horse, so this is the mount of one who brings peace. Jesus fulfills this
prophecy during his triumphal entry into Jerusalem (see Matt. 21:5; John
12:5). righteous and having salvation is he. As Jesus enters Jerusalem,
this saving work is still to be accomplished.
Zechariah Texts Quoted in the New Testament Regarding Jesus’
Ministry
Zechariah Text Content Summary 9:9 11:13 12:10 13:7 the king comes to Zion humble and riding a donkey 30 pieces of silver thrown into the house of the LORD Matt. 27:9
looking on him whom they have pierced the shepherd is struck and the sheep scattered NT Passages
Matt. 21:5; John 12:15
John 19:37; Rev. 1:7
Matt. 26:31; Mark 14:27
FACT
“Your king is coming.” In 9:9, Zechariah prophesies about the coming of
a future king of Israel. The NT quotes this verse when describing Jesus’
triumphal entry into Jerusalem, riding on a donkey (Matt. 21:5; John
12:15).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:10 The Lord will eliminate Israel’s need for
traditional instruments of war: chariot, war horse, and battle bow. He will
provide universal peace (see Ps. 72:8).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:11 The prisoners, those remaining in exile, will be
freed from the waterless pit, a dry well used as a temporary prison (see
Gen. 37:24; Jer. 38:6). This salvation comes because of the blood of my
covenant, that is, the blood of the sacrifices offered to confirm the covenant
(see Ex. 24:8). Because of this covenant bond between God and his people,
they should return to Jerusalem, their “stronghold” (Zech. 9:12; see 2:6–7).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:12–17 The prisoners of war are not the only ones
who need to hear the news of the coming king. The day is coming when
God will make his people themselves into a weapon against their captors (v.
13). As the Divine Warrior, the Lord will conquer his people’s oppressors in
dramatic fashion (vv. 13–14). By destroying their enemies, he will rescue
his people and shepherd his flock (v. 16). As his treasured possession, they
will never again go hungry and thirsty. They will receive the covenantal
blessings of grain and new wine (v. 17).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:13 The oppressors of the sons of Zion (Israel) are
identified as the sons of Greece. God promises to make Zion like a
warrior’s sword, defeating the Greeks. This is a predictive prophecy of
future events (compare Dan. 8:21). Zechariah was writing between 520 and
perhaps 480 B.C., but the Greek ruler Alexander the Great did not conquer
Palestine until 333. Then the Jewish people did not successfully rebel
against Alexander’s successors until the Maccabean period (roughly 166–
142 B.C.). However, the name “Greece” was known at the time of Zechariah,
for the Greeks had defeated Persia at the battle of Marathon in 490 B.C.
Greece was never an enemy of Israel or a conquering world power,
however, until the time of Alexander the Great.
FACT
When did Israel defeat Greece? Zechariah predicted that the sons of Zion
would someday defeat the sons of Greece (9:13). This is probably a
prophecy of the Maccabean revolt in the second century B.C., when the
Jews defeated the successors of Alexander the Great who had become
their rulers.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 9:15–16 tread down the sling stones. These stones
were hurled by slings in battle, but these stones also represent the enemies
themselves. Israel’s army will trample them as they move forward to
conquer. By contrast, God’s people will be saved like the jewels of a
crown.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 10:1–12 In these verses Zechariah describes Judah’s
leaders as “shepherds.” The current shepherds are unfaithful and greedy (vv.
1–5), and God must rescue his people from them (vv. 6–12).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 10:2 In the past, the leaders sought help from
household gods, like those Rachel stole in Gen. 31:34, or from pagan
diviners. Yet these sources offered only empty consolation. They left the
people like sheep without a shepherd.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 10:4 The flock will be transformed from wandering
sheep into a majestic warhorse. Their new leadership is described as a
cornerstone (a building’s foundation stone; see Isa. 28:16), a tent peg
(which provided stability; see Isa. 22:20–23), and a battle bow
(representing military power; see Zech. 9:10). The Lord’s presence with
these leaders guarantees their victory against all enemies.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 10:6 The Lord’s people were once like sheep without
a shepherd (v. 2). He rejected them because they refused to seek
forgiveness for their sin. Now he will have compassion on them. He will
complete the restoration begun when he brought Judah back from exile.
This restoration will extend beyond Judah to include the house of Joseph,
the northern kingdom, which was scattered by the Assyrians in 732, 722,
701, and 671 B.C.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 10:7 Ephraim was one of the most prominent and
centrally located tribes. It represents the entire northern kingdom.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 10:8–12 As a shepherd whistles for his flock, the
Lord will whistle to bring his people back from the nations where he
scattered them. He will signal Israel’s restoration with the same signal he
once used to call Egypt and Assyria to judge Israel (see Isa. 5:26; 7:18).
The Lord will pass through the sea of troubles (Zech. 10:11) and strike
down the waves of the sea, which represent all the enemy forces.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:1–17 Zechariah’s focus turns from the flock back
to the shepherds. The fable of vv. 1–3 tells of impending destruction. In vv.
4–7, attention turns to a single shepherd who acts briefly on behalf of the
flock but then abandons them (vv. 8–14). He is equipped with two staffs,
one symbolizing an international covenant (v. 10) and the other a national
covenant between Judah and Israel (v. 14). Eventually, he breaks both of
these staffs. Verses 15–17 describe the reappointment (once more) of a
foolish shepherd, whose carelessness results in the devastation of the flock
and who thus stands condemned.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:1–3 The glory of Israel’s shepherds, who were
the subjects of the Lord’s judgment in 10:3, will be brought low. They are
pictured as massive cedar trees; as the mighty oaks of Bashan; and as the
lush thicket of the Jordan. As glorious as these trees are, they could be
destroyed by fire or cut down. Like these now-useless trees, Israel’s bad
shepherds will lose their glory when the Lord delivers his people.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:4–17 Zechariah himself acts out the role of a
shepherd who rescues his sheep only to have the sheep come to detest him.
He then leaves the flock to a worthless shepherd.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:4 Zechariah is instructed to become the shepherd
to a flock doomed to slaughter. They were doomed because their corrupt
owners and shepherds cared for them only as a means of acquiring wealth
(vv. 4–17). This represents the Lord’s attitude toward his people in the past.
He had abandoned them without pity to suffer abuse from their Persian
captors and their fellow citizens.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:7 The reason for the Lord’s lack of compassion
for his people becomes clear as the sign-act goes on. Zechariah tended his
flock with staffs named Favor and Union, symbolizing God’s positive
intentions for them.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:8 In a very short time Zechariah removed three
other shepherds and became the shepherd to this flock. This symbolizes a
complete purging of the greedy leaders. But he became impatient with his
flock and they detested him. The three shepherds probably represent either
leaders known to the people of that time or leaders in general whom God
has rejected.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:9 Zechariah resigned from his position as
shepherd, leaving the flock to devour itself.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:10 Zechariah broke his staff named Favor,
breaking his covenant with the nations around Israel, leaving the flock
exposed to them.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:12–13 Zechariah received as his pitifully
inadequate wages thirty pieces of silver, the price of a slave. He rejects the
money and throws it into the house of the LORD, to the potter.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:14 Zechariah broke the second staff, Union,
destroying the unity between the northern and southern kingdoms of Judah
and Israel.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 11:17 Israel rejects the shepherd the Lord has
provided. So the Lord instructs Zechariah to leave the flock to the mercies
of a worthless shepherd who will exploit it for his own benefit. The NT
connects the flock’s rejection of the shepherd and his pitifully inadequate
wages to the rejection and betrayal of Jesus (compare Matt. 27:3–10; John
10:25–27). The Lord will ultimately judge the worthless shepherd. He will
strike his arm and right eye, parts of the body essential for fighting and for
controlling the flock.
12:1–14:21 The Second Oracle: The People and Their Leaders. In this last
section of the book, hope for Judah is tied to the “house of David.” The
future of Jerusalem is described in various ways, each beginning with the
phrase “on that day” (17 times in these three chapters). The description of
divine deliverance (12:1–9) is followed by its impact on different groups
within the community (12:10–13:9). Chapter 14 describes the “day of the
Lord,” a familiar idea throughout the Minor Prophets (see note on Amos
5:18–20).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:1–13:6 Not only will God protect his people, he
will lead them to true repentance and will cleanse them from their sin and
idolatry.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:1–9 In time God will punish the nations that seek
to harm Judah, and will elevate the house of David.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:1 The phrase The oracle of the word of the
LORD begins a new section (see note on 9:1–8) that describes Israel’s
complete restoration and renewal. As Creator, the Lord’s promises of
judgment and redemption are sure because he is able to re-create a new
society out of the existing chaos (compare Gen. 1:1–2).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:2 Jerusalem will be God’s instrument of judgment
on the nations. It will be an intoxicating cup of staggering. Drinking it will
result in shame, disorientation, and destruction (compare Jer. 25:15–29).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:3 The phrase On that day begins a series of nine
such statements. See note on Amos 5:18–20. Jerusalem will become a
heavy stone that will hurt the nations that try to move it.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:4 When the nations of the earth gather against
Jerusalem, the Lord will strike their elite cavalry troops with blindness and
panic (compare Deut. 28:28). As for the house of Judah, the Lord says, I
will keep my eyes open to guard and protect them.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:5–6 The clans of Judah recognize that
Jerusalem’s strength comes only from the LORD of hosts (see note on Amos
3:13). He uses them as a blazing fire or a flaming torch to destroy the
nations around them (Zech. 12:6).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:7 The Abrahamic covenant will be fulfilled (see
Gen. 12:1–3). This will result in glory for Jerusalem and all of Judah but
destruction for the nations that oppose them. Salvation will come to the
tents of Judah first, even before Jerusalem. Either the soldiers in tents or
the poor living in tents outside Jerusalem will experience the Lord’s
deliverance first. Therefore those in Jerusalem must not become proud over
their privileged location.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:8 All of Jerusalem’s inhabitants will be raised to
the highest human glory, like David (1 Sam. 13:14). David’s line will attain
an even greater glory. On that day the descendant of David will lead the
people into battle as the angel of the LORD did in days of old (see Josh.
5:14).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:9 The Lord will bring judgment on all the
nations that come against Jerusalem. The fate of “all the nations,” first
introduced in v. 3, is settled.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 12:10–14 These verses focus primarily on the house
of David and Jerusalem. The “pouring out” of the spirit (that is, God’s
Spirit; v. 10; see Ezek. 39:29; Joel 2:28–29), will result in grace and pleas
for mercy (Zech. 12:10). This implies both forgiveness from the Lord and
repentance from the people. They will mourn because of the one whom
they have pierced (that is, stabbed to death; see Num. 25:8). The mourning
will be like that for a firstborn son, the one on whom all the family’s future
hopes rested. John 19:37 sees this prophecy fulfilled in Jesus.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 13:1–6 To cleanse the repentant people from their
sin, God will open up a fountain (v. 1) from which will flow the running
water necessary for ritual purification (see Lev. 14:5; compare Ezek. 47:1–
12; Rev. 22:1–2). The people’s uncleanness comes from their devotion to
idols (Zech. 13:2; compare Ezek. 36:25). This is the sin that “pierced” the
Lord (Zech. 12:10), a phrase recalled by John as he told of Christ’s death on
the cross (John 19:37). The Lord promises to remove the names of the idols
from the land, ending their influence and memory (Zech. 13:2).
FACT
Zechariah promises that when the people of Jerusalem repent, the Lord
will provide a fountain, or spring, that will cleanse them from their sins
(13:1). They were unclean because they had worshiped idols, but when
they repented, God would forgive them.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 13:7–14:21 Fearsome conflicts await the people of
God, but God will intervene and usher in a day in which Jerusalem is
supreme and all the world worships the true God.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 13:7–9 This time the sword of the Lord’s judgment
goes out against the good shepherd. This scatters the flock and leads to a
time of great trial for God’s people. During this time many will perish. Yet
the testing period will lead to mutual commitment between the Lord and his
people.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:1–11 Terrible times are yet in store for the people
of Jerusalem, but God will visit them and make Jerusalem secure and
prominent.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:4 In a future time that Zechariah does not identify,
enemies will divide Judah’s possessions before her very eyes. Jerusalem
will again be captured and will endure great hardship (vv. 1–2). Yet at the
height of her distress, the Lord will go out once more as a warrior. He will
follow the same route by which he abandoned the Jerusalem temple in
Ezek. 11:23. God’s appearance will shake the natural order (compare Ps.
29:1–11; Isa. 29:6; Mic. 1:3–4; Habakkuk 3). It will split the Mount of
Olives in two, creating a valley aligned from east to west near the temple.
Zechariah’s vision thus echoes the upheaval of the earth at the coming of
the Lord described in Isa. 40:4 and Ezek. 43:2.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:5 This valley will provide an escape route for
Jerusalem’s inhabi­ tants to Azal, an unknown location. It will also provide a
road for the Divine Warrior to return to his city. He will be accompanied by
all the holy ones, which are either his angelic army or the exiles who return
under his protection.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:6 On that day. It is difficult to determine what
period of time is indicated by this chapter’s remarkable prophecies (see 1
Pet. 1:10–11).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:7 The natural order’s transformation at the Lord’s
coming continues. That day will be like the first day of history (literally,
“day one,” see esv footnote), a unique day, which is known to the LORD.
Just as on the first day, before light and darkness had been separated (Gen.
1:3–4), so on that day there will be neither day nor night, but at evening
time there shall be light. Permanent light will prevail.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:8 The living waters that flow from Jerusalem
will reach the Dead Sea and the Mediterranean. Life-giving rivers are a
common feature in descriptions of sanctuaries (see Gen. 2:10; Ps. 46:4;
Ezek. 47:1–12; Joel 3:18; Rev. 22:1).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:9 the LORD will be king over all the earth. This
far exceeds the idea of a Messiah who will deliver Israel, for this predicts a
worldwide earthly reign of the Lord himself. The LORD will be one echoes
the fundamental confession of the OT, “Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God,
the LORD is one” (Deut. 6:4). As the Lord’s sole kingship is established, he
becomes the sole object of worship (compare Zech. 8:20–23).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:10 The territory of Judah will be turned into a flat
plain so that Jerusalem can tower over its surrounding countryside
(compare Isa. 2:2–4).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:11 Jerusalem will be fully inhabited and secure,
without fear of a further decree of utter destruction from the Lord because
of its sins.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:12–21 After the nations have suffered a gruesome
defeat, they will dedicate themselves to worshiping the true God in
Jerusalem.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:16 The nations that once came up against
Jerusalem for war will now come to the city for the three annual festivals,
especially the Feast of Booths in the fall. Like Ezekiel before him (Ezek.
46:9–12), Zechariah writes of ongoing festival worship in a renewed Israel,
but he broadens this vision to include the nations.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:17 And if any of the families of the earth do
not go up. This requirement will be enforced by the threat of a lack of rain,
which will cripple their harvests.
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:20 Holiness will affect everything within
Jerusalem, down to the most humble objects. Even the bells of the horses
will now be inscribed with the phrase Holy to the LORD, which was
previously inscribed on a plate on the high priest’s turban (Ex. 28:36–38).
The whole city will become a temple, the place where the Lord dwells
among his people (compare Rev. 21:22–23).
ZECHARIAH—NOTE ON 14:21 On that day there will no longer be a trader
(or a “Canaanite”; see esv footnote) in the Lord’s house. No longer will
Gentiles enter the temple for business reasons, thus defiling the holiness of
the Lord’s house (see Ezek. 44:9). The temple will finally become a fit
place for the Lord to dwell among his people.
M a l a c h i
(return to table of contents)
Malachi 1 • Malachi 2 • Malachi 3 • Malachi 4
Introduction to Malachi
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
The Setting of Malachi
Key Themes and Outline: Malachi’s Sixfold Wake-up Call to
Renewed Covenant Obedience
Global Message of Malachi
Malachi in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Malachi
The Global Message of Malachi for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Malachi
Introduction to Malachi
Timeline
Author and Date
The prophet Malachi (whose name means “my messenger”) probably lived at
the same time as Ezra and Nehemiah, around 460 B.C.
Theme
Malachi’s fellow Israelites were guilty of corrupt worship and unethical
behavior. He called the people to renewed covenant obedience.
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Malachi’s ministry took place nearly a hundred years after the decree of Cyrus
in 538 B.C., which ended the Babylonian captivity and allowed the Jews to
return to their homeland and rebuild the temple (2 Chron. 36:23). This was
some 80 years after Haggai and Zechariah encouraged the rebuilding of the
temple. Those two earlier prophets had said that the rebuilding of the temple
would result in peace, prosperity, the conversion of people from other nations,
and the return of God’s own glorious presence (see Haggai 2; Zech. 1:16–17;
2:1–13; 8:1–9:17). To the discouraged people of Malachi’s day, these
predictions must have seemed a cruel mockery. In contrast to the glowing
promises, they faced economic difficulties due to drought and crop failure
(Mal. 3:11). They remained an insignificant territory, no longer an independent
nation and no longer ruled by a Davidic king. Worst of all, despite the promise
of God’s presence, they experienced only spiritual decline.
The Setting of Malachi
c. 460 B.C.
Malachi likely prophesied several decades after the first Jewish exiles had
returned from Babylon to Judea and had rebuilt the temple. Edomites had
migrated northwest from their traditional homeland just south of Moab into the
area immediately south of Judea, which was now called Idumea. Territory that
once belonged to the northern kingdom of Israel had been divided into several
minor provinces, including Samaria.
Malachi’ s Sixfold Wake-up Call to Renewed Covenant Fidelity
Disputation Reference Summary Focus
Disputation
1 1:2–5 Disputation
2 1:6–2:9 Malachi defends God’s love for Israel. The proper response to his love is
covenantal obedience and sincere worship.
Malachi exposes offenses related to worship and criticizes the priests for
allowing them.
Israel must remember the Law
of Moses (4:4).
Malachi condemns marriage to an unbeliever as unfaithfulness to Israel’s
Disputation
3 2:10–16
covenant with God. He also condemns unjust divorce as a violation of the
marriage covenant between husband and wife, to which the Lord is witness.
Malachi promises that God will demonstrate his justice. He will do so when
Disputation
4 2:17–3:5
“the messenger of the covenant” comes to judge the wicked and purify his
people. Israel must remember the
Disputation
5 3:6–12 Disputation
6 3:13–4:3 Malachi returns to the subject of Israel’s wicked offerings. The difficulties
promise of Elijah and the
the people are experiencing are punishment for their sin.
coming day of the Lord (4:5–6).
Malachi assures the people that evildoers, who seem to escape divine justice,
will be judged. The Lord will deliver his people.
Malachi summarizes the main points of his prophecy: keep God’s law (the
Summary 4:4–6
focus of disputes 1–3), and remember the promise of a coming prophet like
Elijah and the coming day of the Lord (the focus of disputes 4–6).
Key Themes and Outline: Malachi’s Sixfold Wake-up Call to
Renewed Covenant Obedience
The book of Malachi describes six disputations between God and Israel. There
is a common pattern in each dispute: (1) God charges his people with bad
behavior; (2) he then envisages the people’s response to the charge (“But you
say”; 1:2, 6, 7, 13; 2:14, 17; 3:7, 8, 13); (3) God then replies to their presumed
response and expands the charge. The chart below shows the subject of each
dispute and God’s response to it.
The Global Message of Malachi
“‘I have loved you,’ says the LORD. But you say, ‘How have you loved
us?’” (Mal. 1:2). After the return from exile, the rebuilding of the temple,
and the reinstitution of temple worship, Israel was looking around and
wondering why they were still a marginalized, insignificant nation
compared to the national powers of the day. What had become of God’s
great promises to exalt Israel and punish the godless nations?
The global message of Malachi is that God’s judgment is indeed coming
on his enemies, but God’s people must be more concerned about their own
relationship to him than with anyone else’s fate. The global church must
beware the dead orthodoxy that so easily sets in when church life becomes
routine.
Malachi in Redemptive History
God’ s promises. The long-threatened and well-deserved exile from the
Promised Land had come and gone. A remnant had returned to Judah and
had been eagerly expecting final restoration of all that God had promised
them—supremacy among the nations, the coming of a final Messiah-king,
judgment on the Gentile nations who had oppressed Israel so long, and
lasting peace and prosperity. Above all, they were looking forward to the
day when God himself would dwell among his people once more in glory
(see Hag. 2:1–9; Zech. 1:16–17; 2:1–13; 8:1–9:17).
Yet this was not the picture of life in Israel in Malachi’s day. Instead, the
people were experiencing economic adversity, poor harvests, and pestilence
(see Mal. 3:10–12). Where was the abundance promised and longed for?
God’ s summons. Malachi’s answer is that God will not fail to fulfill what
he has promised to his people, but the time is not yet ripe for such
fulfillment. Instead, God calls the people to love him more than the
abundance they have so long anticipated. Israel must learn once more what
it is to trust the Lord, committing themselves again to the covenant into
which God has entered with them. For it is by such covenant faithfulness
that the nations will be gathered in. Then God’s “name will be great among
the nations” (Mal. 1:11; compare 1:14). When Israel turns to love the Lord
their God with all their heart, then the Gentiles will be attracted to such a
life, such a people, and such a God.
God’ s provision. Ultimately, however, God could not wait for such
Israelite faithfulness to blossom, for it never did blossom and never could.
If his people were to love him with all their heart, something more drastic
was needed. Rather than waiting for his people to love him and in that way
attract the nations, God would send his own Son, pouring out his Spirit onto
his people and moving them from the inside out to walk in his ways as a
witness to the nations of the world (Jer. 31:31–34; Ezek. 36:22–27).
By sending his Son, moreover, God showed his people how the nations
would be won—not by attracting them but by going to them (Gal. 4:4–6).
With the coming of Christ the way by which his people are a light to the
nations has been reversed. Disciples of Christ do not wait for the nations to
come to them. Rather they determine, in sacrificial mission according to the
pattern set by Christ’s own incarnation, to go to the nations (John 20:21).
Universal Themes in Malachi
The pervasive tendency toward spiritually empty religion. The key
indictment against Israel is their hollow, formal, corner-cutting religion.
Their sacrifices to God are manipulated so as to allow them to retain their
best animals (Mal. 1:8); the spiritual leaders only pretend to honor the Lord
(2:1–2); marriage is taken lightly (2:14–16); and tithes are withheld out of
love of money (3:6–12). Everywhere that the church presently thrives,
believers must be vigilant against allowing dead orthodoxy to set in. A sign
of such dead orthodoxy is when doctrinal truth is acknowledged (“Have we
not all one Father? Has not one God created us?” [2:10]) and yet love for
one’s neighbor is neglected, which brings God’s judgment “against those
who oppress the hired worker in his wages, the widow and the fatherless,
against those who thrust aside the sojourner, and do not fear me, says the
LORD of hosts” (3:5).
The worldwide exaltation of God’ s name. Amid his indictment of Israel’s
sin, the Lord reiterates the global dimensions of the worship he deserves.
“For from the rising of the sun to its setting my name will be great among
the nations, and in every place incense will be offered to my name, and a
pure offering. For my name will be great among the nations” (Mal. 1:11).
“For I am a great King, says the LORD of hosts, and my name will be feared
among the nations” (1:14). In light of his people’s failure to be a light to the
nations, God will bring “utter destruction” on “the great and awesome day
of the LORD” (4:5–6). Yet this day will also be linked with the return of
Elijah to turn the hearts of the people back to God, once and for all
vindicating God’s great name and glory (see Matt. 17:12; Luke 1:17; John
13:32; 17:1).
The Global Message of Malachi for Today
God’s people around the world today have been promised great and
glorious things, just as God’s people of old had been. Yet like Israel upon
returning from the exile, the glory for which we so eagerly wait remains
perplexingly elusive as we live life under the sun in this fallen world. Sin
and sickness, abuse and maligning, discouragement and setbacks—such is
the lot of those who live in a diseased world. Indeed, some suffering is
unique to followers of Christ (Acts 14:22; 2 Tim. 3:12).
Yet like the faithful remnant who determined to trust the Lord no matter
what in Malachi’s day (Mal. 3:16–18), we too must cling to God and his
promises regardless of what afflictions befall us—physically, politically,
emotionally, relationally, culturally. The curse of the fall infects all aspects
of life, yet the coming final restoration will likewise redeem all aspects of
life. This restoration has already dawned in Christ and is guaranteed to all
of God’s children, who enjoy the down payment of the Spirit in anticipation
of the coming full liberation from sin and death (Rom. 8:18–25; 2 Cor.
1:22; Eph. 1:13–14).
Joy is secure. Glory awaits. Hope stands fast.