1 CORINTHIANS 14 [†] s Pursue love, and t earnestly desire the u spiritual
gifts, especially that you may v prophesy.
2[†]For w one who speaks in a
tongue speaks not to men but to God; for no one understands him, but he
utters mysteries in the Spirit. 3On the other hand, the one who prophesies
speaks to people for their upbuilding and encouragement and consolation.
4[†]The one who speaks in a tongue builds up himself, but the one who
prophesies builds up the church. 5[†]Now I want you all to speak in
tongues, but x even more to prophesy. The one who prophesies is greater
than the one who speaks in tongues, unless someone interprets, so that the
church may be built up.
6[†]Now, brothers, [1] if I come to you speaking in tongues, how will I
benefit you unless I bring you some y revelation or knowledge or prophecy
or z teaching? 7If even lifeless instruments, such as the flute or the harp, do
not give distinct notes, how will anyone know what is played? 8And a if the
bugle gives an indistinct sound, who will get ready for battle? 9So with
yourselves, if with your tongue you utter speech that is not intelligible, how
will anyone know what is said? For you will be b speaking into the air.
10There are doubtless many different languages in the world, and none is
without meaning, 11but if I do not know the meaning of the language, I will
be c a foreigner to the speaker and the speaker a foreigner to me. 12So with
yourselves, since you are eager for manifestations of the Spirit, strive to
excel in building up the church.
13Therefore, one who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may
interpret. 14[†]For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays but my mind is
unfruitful. 15What am I to do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will pray with
my mind also; d I will sing praise with my spirit, but I will e sing with my
mind also. 16[†]Otherwise, if you give thanks with your spirit, how can
anyone in the position of an outsider [2] say f “Amen” to g your thanksgiving
when he does not know what you are saying? 17For you may be giving
thanks well enough, but the other person is not being built up. 18[†]I thank
God that I speak in tongues more than all of you. 19Nevertheless, in church
I would rather speak five words with my mind in order to instruct others,
than ten thousand words in a tongue.
20[†]Brothers, h do not be children in your thinking. i Be infants in evil,
but in your thinking be j mature. 21[†] k In the Law it is written, l “By people
of strange tongues and by the lips of foreigners will I speak to this people,
and even then they will not listen to me, says the Lord.” 22[†]Thus tongues
are a sign not for believers but for unbelievers, while prophecy is a sign [3]
not for unbelievers but for believers. 23If, therefore, the whole church
comes together and all speak in tongues, and outsiders or unbelievers enter,
m will they not say that you are out of your minds? 24But if all prophesy,
and an unbeliever or outsider enters, he is convicted by all, he is called to
account by all, 25 n the secrets of his heart are disclosed, and so, o falling on
his face, he will worship God and p declare that God is really among you.
Orderly Worship
26[†]What then, brothers? When you come together, each one has q a hymn,
r a lesson, r a revelation, s a tongue, or t an interpretation. u Let all things be
done for building up. 27[†]If any speak in s a tongue, let there be only two
or at most three, and each in turn, and let someone interpret. 28[†]But if
there is no one to interpret, let each of them keep silent in church and speak
to himself and to God. 29[†]Let two or three prophets speak, and let the
others v weigh what is said. 30If a revelation is made to another sitting there,
w let the first be silent. 31For you can all prophesy one by one, so that all
may learn and all be encouraged, 32[†]and the spirits of prophets are subject
to prophets. 33[†]For God is not a God of x confusion but of peace.
As in y all the churches of the saints, 34[†] z the women should keep silent
in the churches. For they are not permitted to speak, but a should be in
submission, as b the Law also says. 35If there is anything they desire to
learn, let them ask their husbands at home. For it is shameful for a woman
to speak in church.
36Or was it from you that the word of God came? Or are you the only
ones it has reached? 37[†] c If anyone thinks that he is a prophet, or spiritual,
he should acknowledge that the things I am writing to you are a command
of the Lord. 38If anyone does not recognize this, he is not recognized. 39So,
my brothers, d earnestly desire to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in
tongues. 40
e But all things should be done decently and f in order.
The Resurrection of Christ