1 CORINTHIANS 3 [†]But I, brothers, [1] could not address you as a spiritual
people, but as b people of the flesh, as c infants in Christ. 2[†] d I fed you
with milk, not solid food, for e you were not ready for it. And even now you
are not yet ready,
3for you are still of the flesh. For while there is f jealousy
and strife among you, are you not of the flesh and behaving only in a
human way? 4For g when one says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow
Apollos,” h are you not being merely human?
5What then is Apollos? What is Paul? i Servants through whom you
believed, j as the Lord assigned to each. 6 k I planted, l Apollos watered,
m but God gave the growth. 7So n neither he who plants nor he who waters
is anything, but only God who gives the growth. 8[†]He who plants and he
who waters are one, and each o will receive his wages according to his
labor.
9For we are p God’s fellow workers. You are God’s field, q God’s
building.
10 r According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master
builder I laid a s foundation, and t someone else is building upon it. Let
each one take care how he builds upon it. 11For no one can lay a
u foundation other v than that which is laid, w which is Jesus Christ.
12[†]Now if anyone builds on the foundation with gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, straw— 13
x each one’s work will become manifest, for
the Day will disclose it, because it will be revealed y by fire, and z the fire
will test what sort of work each one has done. 14[†]If the work that anyone
has built on the foundation survives, a he will receive a reward. 15If
anyone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss, though he himself will be
saved, b but only as through fire.
16[†] c Do you not know that you [2] are God’s temple and that God’s
Spirit dwells in you? 17If anyone destroys God’s temple, God will destroy
him. For d God’s temple is holy, and you are that temple.
18
e Let no one deceive himself. f If anyone among you thinks that he is
wise in this age, let him become a fool that he may become wise. 19For
g the wisdom of this world is folly with God. For it is written, h “He catches
the wise in their craftiness,” 20and again, i “The Lord knows the thoughts of
the wise, that they are futile.” 21[†]So j let no one boast in men. For k all
things are yours, 22whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or
death or the present or the future—all are yours, 23and l you are Christ’s,
and m Christ is God’s.
The Ministry of Apostles