1 PETER 1 [†]Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
To those who are elect exiles of a the Dispersion in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 2[†]according to b the foreknowledge of
God the Father, c in the sanctification of the Spirit, for obedience to Jesus
Christ and d for sprinkling with his blood:
May e grace and f peace be multiplied to you.
Born Again to a Living Hope
3[†] g Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! h According
to his great mercy, i he has caused us to be born again to a living hope
j through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 4[†]to k an
inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and l unfading, m kept in heaven
for you, 5[†]who by God’s power are being guarded n through faith for a
salvation o ready to be revealed in the last time. 6[†]In this you rejoice,
though now for a little while, if necessary, you have been grieved by
p various trials, 7so that q the tested genuineness of your faith—more
precious than gold that perishes r though it is tested by s fire—may be
found to result in t praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus
Christ. 8
u Though you have not seen him, you love him. v Though you do
not now see him, you believe in him and rejoice with joy that is
inexpressible and filled with glory,
9obtaining w the outcome of your faith,
the salvation of your souls.
10[†]Concerning this salvation, x the prophets who prophesied about the
grace that was to be yours searched and inquired carefully,
11inquiring
y what person or time z the Spirit of Christ in them was indicating a when he
predicted b the sufferings of Christ and the subsequent glories. 12[†] c It was
revealed to them that d they were serving not themselves but you, in the
things that have now been announced to you through those who preached
the good news to you e by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven, f things into
which angels long to look.
Called to Be Holy
13[†]Therefore, g preparing your minds for action, [1] and h being sober-
minded, set your hope fully on the grace that will be brought to you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ. 14[†]As obedient children, i do not be conformed
to the passions j of your former ignorance, 15but k as he who called you is
holy, you also be holy l in all your conduct, 16since it is written, m “You
shall be holy, for I am holy.” 17[†]And if you n call on him as Father who
o judges p impartially according to each one’s deeds, conduct yourselves
q with fear throughout the time of your exile, 18[†]knowing that you r were
ransomed from s the futile ways inherited from your forefathers, not with
perishable things such as silver or gold, 19but t with the precious blood of
Christ, like that of u a lamb v without blemish or spot. 20[†]He was
foreknown before the foundation of the world but w was made manifest x in
the last times for the sake of you 21 y who through him are believers in God,
z who raised him from the dead and a gave him glory, so that your faith and
hope are in God.
22[†]Having purified your souls by your obedience to the truth for b a
sincere brotherly love, c love one another earnestly from a pure heart,
23[†] d since you have been born again, e not of perishable seed but of
imperishable, through f the living and abiding word of God; 24[†]for
g “All flesh is like grass
and all its glory like the flower of grass.
The grass withers,
and the flower falls,
25
h but the word of the Lord remains forever.”
And this word i is the good news that was preached to you.
A Living Stone and a Holy People