2 CORINTHIANS 7 [†]Since we have these promises, beloved, j let us
cleanse ourselves from every defilement of body [1] and spirit, bringing
holiness to completion in the fear of God.
Paul’s Joy
2[†] k Make room in your hearts [2] for us. l We have wronged no one, we
have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one. 3I do not say
this to condemn you, for I said before that m you are in our hearts, to die
together and to live together.
4I am acting with n great boldness toward you;
o I have great pride in you; p I am filled with comfort. In all our affliction, I
am overflowing with joy.
5[†]For even q when we came into Macedonia, our bodies had no rest, but
we were afflicted at every turn— r fighting without and fear within. 6[†]But
s God, who comforts the downcast, t comforted us by the coming of Titus,
7and not only by his coming but also by the comfort with which he was
comforted by you, as he told us of your longing, your mourning, your zeal
for me, so that I rejoiced still more. 8For u even if I made you grieve with
my letter, I do not regret it—though v I did regret it, for I see that that letter
grieved you, though only for a while. 9As it is, I rejoice, not because you
were grieved, but w because you were grieved into repenting. For you felt a
godly grief, so that you suffered no loss through us.
10[†]For x godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation
without regret, whereas y worldly grief produces death. 11[†]For see what
earnestness this godly grief has produced in you, but also what eagerness to
clear yourselves, what indignation, what fear, what longing, z what zeal,
what punishment! At every point you have proved yourselves innocent in
the matter.
12So although I wrote to you, it was not for the sake of the one
a who did the wrong, nor for the sake of the one who suffered the wrong,
but in order that your earnestness for us might be revealed to you in the
sight of God. 13[†]Therefore b we are comforted.
And besides our own comfort, we rejoiced still more at the joy of Titus,
because his spirit c has been refreshed by you all. 14For d whatever boasts I
made to him about you, I was not put to shame. But just as everything we
said to you e was true, so also our boasting before Titus has proved true.
15And his affection for you is even greater, as he remembers f the obedience
of you all, how you received him with fear and trembling. 16[†]I rejoice,
because I have complete g confidence in you.
Encouragement to Give Generously