2 CORINTHIANS 2 [†]For I made up my mind u not to make another
painful visit to you. 2For v if I cause you pain, who is there to make me glad
but the one whom I have pained? 3And I wrote as I did, so that when I came
I might not suffer pain from those who should have made me rejoice, w for I
felt sure of all of you, that my joy would be the joy of you all. 4[†]For x I
wrote to you out of much affliction and anguish of heart and with many
tears, not to cause you pain but to let you know the abundant love that I
have for you.
Forgive the Sinner
5[†]Now y if anyone has caused pain, z he has caused it not to me, but a in
some measure—not to put it too severely—to all of you. 6[†]For such a one,
b this punishment by the majority is enough, 7so c you should rather turn to
forgive and comfort him, or he may be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow.
8So I beg you to reaffirm your love for him. 9For this is why I wrote, that I
might d test you and know e whether you are obedient in everything.
10Anyone whom you forgive, I also forgive. Indeed, what I have forgiven, if
I have forgiven anything, has been for your sake in the presence of Christ,
11[†]so that we would not be outwitted by Satan; for f we are not ignorant of
his designs.
Triumph in Christ
12[†]When g I came to Troas to preach the gospel of Christ, even though h a
door was opened for me in the Lord, 13my spirit i was not at rest because I
did not find my brother Titus there. So I took leave of them and went on to
Macedonia.
14[†]But j thanks be to God, who in Christ always k leads us in triumphal
procession, and through us spreads l the fragrance of the knowledge of him
everywhere. 15[†]For we are the aroma of Christ to God among m those who
are being saved and among n those who are perishing, 16[†] o to one a
fragrance from death to death, o to the other a fragrance from life to life.
p Who is sufficient for these things? 17For we are not, like so many,
peddlers of God’s word, but as men of sincerity, as commissioned by God,
in the sight of God we speak in Christ.
Ministers of the New Covenant