ACTS 7 [†]And the high priest said, “Are these things so?” 2And Stephen
said:
j “Brothers and fathers, hear me. k The God l of glory appeared to our
father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, m before he lived in Haran,
3and said to him, n ‘Go out from your land and from your kindred and go
into the land that I will show you.’ 4 m Then he went out from the land of the
Chaldeans and lived in Haran. And o after his father died, p God removed
him from there into this land in which you are now living. 5Yet he gave him
no inheritance in it, not even a foot’s length, but promised q to give it to him
as a possession and to his offspring after him, r though he had no child.
6[†]And God spoke to this effect—that s his offspring would t be sojourners
in a land belonging to others, who would enslave them and afflict them
u four hundred years. 7[†]‘But v I will judge the nation that they serve,’ said
God, ‘and after that they shall come out w and worship me in this place.’
8And x he gave him the covenant of circumcision. And y so Abraham
became the father of Isaac, and z circumcised him on the eighth day, and
a Isaac became the father of Jacob, and b Jacob of the twelve patriarchs.
9[†]“And the patriarchs, c jealous of Joseph, d sold him into Egypt; but
e God was with him 10and rescued him out of all his afflictions and f gave
him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, g who made him
ruler over Egypt and over all his household. 11Now h there came a famine
throughout all Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction, and our fathers could
find no food. 12 i But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he
sent out our fathers on their first visit. 13And j on the second visit k Joseph
made himself known to his brothers, and l Joseph’s family became known
to Pharaoh. 14[†]And m Joseph sent and summoned Jacob his father and all
his kindred, n seventy-five persons in all. 15And o Jacob went down into
Egypt, and p he died, he q and our fathers, 16[†]and r they were carried back
to Shechem and laid in the tomb that s Abraham had bought for a sum of
silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.
17“But t as the time of the promise drew near, which God had granted to
Abraham, u the people increased and multiplied in Egypt 18until there arose
over Egypt another king v who did not know Joseph. 19 w He dealt shrewdly
with our race and forced our fathers to expose their infants, x so that they
would not be kept alive. 20[†] y At this time Moses was born; and he was
beautiful in God’s sight. And he was brought up for three months in his
father’s house, 21and z when he was exposed, Pharaoh’s daughter adopted
him and brought him up as her own son. 22[†]And Moses a was instructed
in b all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was c mighty in his words and
deeds.
23[†]“When he was forty years old, it came into his heart d to visit his
brothers, the children of Israel. 24And seeing one of them being wronged,
he defended the oppressed man and avenged him by striking down the
Egyptian. 25He supposed that his brothers would understand that God was
giving them salvation by his hand, but they did not understand. 26 e And on
the following day he appeared to them as they were quarreling and tried to
reconcile them, saying, ‘Men, you are brothers. Why do you wrong each
other?’ 27But the man who was wronging his neighbor thrust him aside,
saying, f ‘Who made you a ruler and a judge over us? 28Do you want to kill
me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’ 29At this retort g Moses fled and
became an exile in the land of Midian, h where he became the father of two
sons.
30“Now when forty years had passed, i an angel appeared to him j in the
wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush. 31When Moses saw
it, he was amazed at the sight, and as he drew near to look, there came the
voice of the Lord: 32 k ‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham
and of Isaac and of Jacob.’ And Moses trembled and did not dare to look.
33Then the Lord said to him, l ‘Take off the sandals from your feet, for the
place where you are standing is holy ground. 34
m I have surely seen the
affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and n have heard their groaning,
and o I have come down to deliver them. p And now come, I will send you
to Egypt.’
35[†]“This Moses, whom they rejected, q saying, ‘Who made you a ruler
and a judge?’—this man God sent as both ruler and redeemer r by the hand
of the angel who appeared to him in the bush. 36 s This man led them out,
performing t wonders and signs u in Egypt and v at the Red Sea and w in the
wilderness for x forty years. 37[†]This is the Moses who said to the
Israelites, ‘God will raise up for you y a prophet like me from your
brothers.’ 38[†]This is the one z who was in the congregation in the
wilderness with a the angel who spoke to him at Mount Sinai, and with our
fathers. b He received c living d oracles to give to us. 39Our fathers refused
to obey him, but thrust him aside, and e in their hearts they turned to Egypt,
40[†]saying to Aaron, f ‘Make for us gods who will go before us. As for this
Moses who led us out from the land of Egypt, we do not know what has
become of him.’ 41And g they made a calf in those days, and offered a
sacrifice to the idol and h were rejoicing in i the works of their hands.
42[†]But j God turned away and k gave them over to worship l the host of
heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets:
m “‘Did you bring to me slain beasts and sacrifices,
n during the forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
43 You took up the tent of o Moloch
and the star of your god Rephan,
the images that you made to worship;
and I will send you into exile beyond Babylon.’
44[†]“Our fathers had p the tent of witness in the wilderness, just as he
who spoke to Moses q directed him to make it, according to the pattern that
he had seen. 45Our fathers in turn r brought it in with Joshua when they
s dispossessed the nations t that God drove out before our fathers. So it was
u until the days of David, 46
v who found favor in the sight of God and
w asked to find a dwelling place for x the God of Jacob. [1] 47But it was
y Solomon who built a house for him. 48[†] z Yet the Most High does not
dwell a in houses made by hands, as the prophet says,
49 b “‘Heaven is my throne,
c and the earth is my footstool.
What kind of house will you build for me, says the Lord,
or what is the place of my rest?
50 Did not my hand make all these things?’
51[†] d “You stiff-necked people, e uncircumcised in heart and ears, you
always resist the Holy Spirit. f As your fathers did, so do you. 52[†] g Which
of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? And they killed those who
announced beforehand the coming of h the Righteous One, i whom you
have now betrayed and murdered, 53you who received the law j as delivered
by angels and k did not keep it.”
The Stoning of Stephen
54Now when they heard these things l they were enraged, and they m ground
their teeth at him. 55But he, n full of the Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven and
saw o the glory of God, and Jesus standing p at the right hand of God. 56And
he said, “Behold, I see q the heavens opened, and r the Son of Man standing
p at the right hand of God.” 57But they cried out with a loud voice and
stopped their ears and rushed together [2] at him. 58[†]Then s they cast him
out of the city and t stoned him. And u the witnesses laid down their
garments v at the feet of a young man named Saul. 59[†]And as they were
stoning Stephen, w he called out, “Lord Jesus, x receive my spirit.” 60And
y falling to his knees he cried out with a loud voice, z “Lord, do not hold
this sin against them.” And when he had said this, a he fell asleep.
Saul Ravages the Church