ACTS 14 [†]Now at Iconium a they entered together into the Jewish
synagogue and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and
Greeks believed. 2
b But the c unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles and
poisoned their minds against d the brothers. [1] 3So they remained for a long
time, speaking boldly for e the Lord, who bore witness to f the word of his
grace, g granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands. 4[†]But the
people of the city h were divided; i some sided with the Jews and some with
the apostles. 5When an attempt was made by both Gentiles and Jews, with
their rulers, j to mistreat them and k to stone them, 6they learned of it and
l fled to m Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and to the surrounding
country,
7and there they continued to preach the gospel.
Paul and Barnabas at Lystra
8[†]Now at Lystra there was a man sitting who could not use his feet. He
was n crippled from birth and had never walked. 9[†]He listened to Paul
speaking. And Paul, looking intently at him and o seeing that he had faith to
be made well, [2] 10said in a loud voice, “Stand upright on your feet.” And
he p sprang up and began walking. 11[†]And when the crowds saw what
Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in Lycaonian, q “The gods
have come down to us in the likeness of men!” 12Barnabas they called
r Zeus, and Paul, Hermes, because he was the chief speaker.
13And the
priest of r Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance to the city, brought oxen
and garlands to the gates and s wanted to offer sacrifice with the crowds.
14[†]But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they t tore their
garments and rushed out into the crowd, crying out, 15“Men, u why are you
doing these things? We also are men, v of like nature with you, and we bring
you good news, that w you should turn from these x vain things to y a living
God, z who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in
them. 16In past generations he a allowed all the nations b to walk in their
own ways. 17[†]Yet c he did not leave himself without witness, for he d did
good by e giving you rains from heaven and f fruitful seasons, satisfying
your hearts with g food and h gladness.” 18Even with these words they
scarcely restrained the people from offering sacrifice to them.
Paul Stoned at Lystra
19[†] i But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and having persuaded the
crowds, j they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that
he was dead. 20[†]But when the disciples gathered about him, he rose up
and entered the city, and on the next day he went on with Barnabas to
Derbe. 21[†]When they had preached the gospel to that city and had k made
many disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch,
22[†] l strengthening the souls of the disciples, encouraging them m to
continue in n the faith, and saying that o through many tribulations we must
enter the kingdom of God. 23[†]And when they had p appointed q elders for
them in every church, with prayer and fasting r they committed them to the
Lord in whom they had believed.
Paul and Barnabas Return to Antioch in Syria
24[†]Then they passed through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia. 25And when
they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia, 26and from
there they sailed to Antioch, s where they had been t commended to the
grace of God for the work that they had fulfilled. 27[†]And when they
arrived and gathered the church together, u they declared all that God had
done with them, and v how he had w opened x a door of faith to the Gentiles.
28And they remained no little time with the disciples.
The Jerusalem Council