ACTS 8 [†]And b Saul c approved of his execution.
And there arose on that day a great persecution against the church in
Jerusalem, and d they were all scattered throughout the regions of Judea and
Samaria, except the apostles. 2Devout men buried Stephen and made great
lamentation over him. 3[†]But e Saul was ravaging the church, and entering
house after house, he f dragged off men and women and committed them to
prison.
Philip Proclaims Christ in Samaria
4Now g those who were scattered went about preaching the word.
5[†] h Philip went down to the city [1] of Samaria and proclaimed to them the
Christ. 6[†] i And the crowds with one accord paid attention to what was
being said by Philip when they heard him j and saw the signs that he did.
7For k unclean spirits, crying out with a loud voice, came out of many who
had them, and many who were paralyzed or lame were healed. 8So l there
was much joy in that city.
Simon the Magician Believes
9[†]But there was a man named Simon, m who had previously practiced
magic in the city and amazed the people of Samaria, n saying that he
himself was somebody great. 10They all paid attention to him, from the least
to the greatest, saying, o “This man is the power of God that is called
p Great.” 11And they paid attention to him because for a long time he had
q amazed them with his magic. 12But when r they believed Philip as he
preached good news s about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus
Christ, r they were baptized, both men and women. 13[†]Even Simon
himself believed, and after being baptized he continued with Philip. And
t seeing signs and u great miracles [2] performed, v he was amazed.
14[†]Now when w the apostles at Jerusalem heard that x Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent to them Peter and John, 15who came
down and prayed for them y that they might receive the Holy Spirit, 16for
z he had not yet a fallen on any of them, but b they had only been baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus. 17[†]Then c they laid their hands on them and
d they received the Holy Spirit. 18[†]Now when Simon saw that the Spirit
was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them
money,
19saying, “Give me this power also, so that anyone on whom I lay
my hands may receive the Holy Spirit.” 20But Peter said to him, e “May
your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift
of God f with money! 21[†]You have neither part "../chapter_texts"nor lot in this matter, for
g your heart is not right before God. 22Repent, therefore, of this wickedness
of yours, and pray to the Lord that, h if possible, the intent of your heart
may be forgiven you. 23For I see that you are in i the gall [3] of bitterness
and in j the bond of iniquity.” 24[†]And Simon answered, k “Pray for me to
the Lord, that nothing of what you have said may come upon me.”
25[†]Now when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they
returned to Jerusalem, l preaching the gospel to many villages of the
Samaritans.
Philip and the Ethiopian Eunuch
26[†]Now m an angel of the Lord said to Philip, “Rise and go toward the
south [4] to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.” This is a
desert place. 27And he rose and went. And there was an n Ethiopian, a
o eunuch, a court official of Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, p who was in
charge of all her treasure. q He had come to Jerusalem to worship 28and was
returning, seated in his chariot, and he was reading the prophet Isaiah.
29And the Spirit said to Philip, “Go over and join this chariot.” 30[†]So
Philip ran to him and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet and asked, “Do
you understand what you are reading?” 31And he said, r “How can I, unless
someone s guides me?” And t he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.
32Now the passage of the Scripture that he was reading was this:
u “Like a sheep he was led to the slaughter
and like a lamb before its shearer is silent,
so he opens not his mouth.
33 In his v humiliation justice was denied him.
Who can describe his generation?
For his life is taken away from the earth.”
34And the eunuch said to Philip, “About whom, I ask you, does the prophet
say this, about himself or about someone else?” 35Then Philip opened his
mouth, and w beginning with this Scripture x he told him the good news
about Jesus. 36And as they were going along the road they came to some
water, and the eunuch said, “See, here is water! y What prevents me from
being baptized?” [5] 38And he commanded the chariot to stop, and they both
went down into the water, Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him.
39[†]And when they came up out of the water, z the Spirit of the Lord
a carried Philip away, and the eunuch saw him no more, and went on his
way rejoicing. 40[†]But Philip found himself at Azotus, and as he passed
through he preached the gospel to all the towns until he came to Caesarea.
The Conversion of Saul