ACTS 6 [†]Now in these days k when the disciples were increasing in
number, a complaint by the Hellenists [1] arose against the Hebrews because
their widows were being neglected in l the daily distribution. 2And the
twelve summoned the full number of the disciples and said, “It is not right
that we should give up preaching the word of God to serve tables.
3 m Therefore, brothers, [2] pick out from among you seven men n of good
repute, o full of the Spirit and of wisdom, whom we will appoint to this
duty.
4But p we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the
word.” 5[†]And what they said pleased the whole gathering, and they chose
Stephen, q a man full of faith and r of the Holy Spirit, and s Philip, and
Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolaus, t a
proselyte of Antioch. 6[†]These they set before the apostles, and u they
prayed and v laid their hands on them.
7[†]And w the word of God continued to increase, and the number of the
disciples multiplied greatly in Jerusalem, and a great many of the priests
x became obedient to y the faith.
Stephen Is Seized
8[†]And Stephen, full of grace and z power, was doing great wonders and
signs among the people. 9[†]Then some of those who belonged to the
synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called), and of the Cyrenians, and of
the Alexandrians, and of those from Cilicia and Asia, rose up and disputed
with Stephen. 10But a they could not withstand the wisdom and the Spirit
with which he was speaking. 11Then b they secretly instigated men who
said, “We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and
God.” 12And they stirred up the people and the elders and the scribes, and
they came upon him and seized him and brought him before the council,
13and they c set up false d witnesses who said, “This man never ceases to
speak words against e this holy place and the law,
14[†]for we have heard
him say that this Jesus of Nazareth f will destroy this place and will
g change h the customs that Moses delivered to us.” 15[†]And gazing at him,
all who sat in the council saw that his face i was like the face of an angel.
Stephen’s Speech