HEBREWS 12 [†]Therefore, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us also lay aside every weight, and w sin which clings so
closely, and x let us run y with endurance the race that is z set before us,
2[†]looking to Jesus, the founder and perfecter of our faith, a who for the
joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising b the shame, and
c is seated at the right hand of the throne of God.
Do Not Grow Weary
3[†] d Consider him who endured from sinners such hostility against
himself, so that you may not grow weary or e fainthearted. 4[†]In your
struggle against sin you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your
blood. 5[†]And have you forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as
sons?
f “My son, g do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord,
nor be weary when reproved by him.
6 For h the Lord disciplines the one he loves,
and chastises every son whom he receives.”
7It is for discipline that you have to endure. i God is treating you as sons.
For what son is there whom his father does not discipline? 8If you are left
without discipline, j in which all have participated, then you are illegitimate
children and not sons. 9Besides this, we have had earthly fathers who
disciplined us and we respected them. Shall we not much more be subject to
k the Father of spirits l and live? 10For they disciplined us for a short time as
it seemed best to them, but he disciplines us for our good, m that we may
share his holiness. 11
n For the moment all discipline seems painful rather
than pleasant, but later it yields o the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those
who have been trained by it.
12[†]Therefore p lift your drooping hands and strengthen your weak
knees, 13and q make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may
not be put out of joint r but rather be healed. 14[†] s Strive for peace with
everyone, and for the t holiness u without which no one will see the Lord.
15[†]See to it that no one v fails to obtain the grace of God; that no w “root
of bitterness” springs up and causes trouble, and by it many become defiled;
16[†]that no one is x sexually immoral or unholy like Esau, who sold his
birthright for a single meal. 17For you know that y afterward, when he
desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no chance to
repent, though he sought it with tears.
A Kingdom That Cannot Be Shaken
18[†]For you have not come to z what may be touched, a blazing fire and
darkness and gloom and a tempest 19and a the sound of a trumpet and a
voice whose words b made the hearers beg that no further messages be
spoken to them. 20For they could not endure the order that was given, c “If
even a beast touches the mountain, it shall be stoned.” 21Indeed, d so
terrifying was the sight that Moses said, “I tremble with fear.” 22[†]But you
have come to e Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, f the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to g innumerable angels in festal gathering, 23[†]and to h the
assembly [1] of the firstborn who are i enrolled in heaven, and to j God, the
judge of all, and to the spirits of the righteous made perfect, 24[†]and to
Jesus, k the mediator of a new covenant, and to l the sprinkled blood m that
speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.
25[†]See that you do not refuse him who is speaking. For n if they did not
escape when they refused him who warned them on earth, much less will
we escape if we reject him who warns from heaven. 26[†]At that time o his
voice shook the earth, but now he has promised, p “Yet once more I will
shake not only the earth but also the heavens.” 27This phrase, “Yet once
more,” indicates q the removal of things that are shaken—that is, things that
have been made—in order that the things that cannot be shaken may
remain. 28[†]Therefore let us be grateful for receiving r a kingdom that
cannot be shaken, and thus s let us offer to God acceptable worship, with
reverence and awe, 29for our t God is a consuming fire.
Sacrifices Pleasing to God