JOHN 21 [†]After this Jesus b revealed himself c again to the disciples by
d the Sea of Tiberias, and he revealed himself in this way.
2[†]Simon Peter,
e Thomas (called the Twin), Nathanael of f Cana in Galilee, g the sons of
Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together.
3[†]Simon Peter said
to them, “I am going fishing.” They said to him, “We will go with you.”
They went out and got into the boat, but h that night they caught nothing.
4Just as day was breaking, Jesus stood on the shore; yet the disciples i did
not know that it was Jesus. 5 j Jesus said to them, “Children, do you have
any fish?” They answered him, “No.” 6 k He said to them, “Cast the net on
the right side of the boat, and you will find some.” So they cast it, and now
they were not able to haul it in, because of the quantity of fish. 7[†]That
disciple l whom Jesus loved therefore said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” When
Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, m he put on his outer garment, for
he was n stripped for work, and o threw himself into the sea. 8The other
disciples came in the boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not far
from the land, but about a hundred yards [1] off.
9[†]When they got out on land, they saw a charcoal fire in place, with
fish laid out on it, and bread. 10Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish
that you have just caught.” 11[†]So Simon Peter went aboard and hauled the
net ashore, full of large fish, 153 of them. And although there were so many,
the net was not torn. 12Jesus said to them, p “Come and q have breakfast.”
Now r none of the disciples dared ask him, “Who are you?” They knew it
was the Lord. 13Jesus came and s took the bread and gave it to them, and so
with the fish. 14 t This was now the third time that Jesus was revealed to the
disciples after he was raised from the dead.
Jesus and Peter
15[†]When they had u finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter,
v “Simon, w son of John, x do you love me more than these?” He said to
him, “Yes, Lord; you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Feed y my
lambs.” 16He said to him a second time, “Simon, son of John, do you love
me?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord; you know that I love you.” He said to
him, z “Tend y my sheep.” 17He said to him the third time, “Simon, son of
John, do you love me?” Peter was grieved because he said to him a the third
time, “Do you love me?” and he said to him, “Lord, b you know everything;
you know that I love you.” Jesus said to him, “Feed c my sheep.
18[†] d Truly, truly, I say to you, when you were young, e you used to dress
yourself and walk wherever you wanted, but when you are old, you will
stretch out your hands, and another will dress you and carry you where you
do not want to go.” 19(This he said to show f by what kind of death he was
to glorify God.) And after saying this he said to him, g “Follow me.”
Jesus and the Beloved Apostle
20Peter turned and saw h the disciple whom Jesus loved following them,
i the one who also had leaned back against him during the supper and had
said, “Lord, who is it that is going to betray you?” 21When Peter saw him,
he said to Jesus, “Lord, what about this man?” 22Jesus said to him, “If it is
my will that he remain j until k I come, what is that to you? l You follow
me!” 23So the saying spread abroad among m the brothers [2] that this
disciple was not to die; yet Jesus did not say to him that he was not to die,
but, “If it is my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you?”
24[†]This is the disciple n who is bearing witness about these things, and
who has written these things, and o we know p that his testimony is true.
25[†]Now q there are also many other things that Jesus did. Were every
one of them to be written, I suppose that r the world itself could not contain
the books that would be written.
}


{
The Promise of the Holy Spirit