LUKE 3 [†]In the fifteenth year of the reign of j Tiberius Caesar, k Pontius
Pilate l being governor of Judea, and m Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and
his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and
Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene, 2[†]during n the high priesthood of Annas and
o Caiaphas, p the word of God came to q John the son of Zechariah in r the
wilderness. 3[†]And he went into all the region around the Jordan,
proclaiming s a baptism of repentance t for the forgiveness of sins. 4[†]As it
is written in u the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet,
v “The voice of one crying in the wilderness:
w ‘Prepare the way of the Lord, [1]
make his paths straight.
5 x Every valley shall be filled,
y and every mountain and hill shall be made low,
z and the crooked shall become straight,
and the rough places shall become level ways,
6[†] a and all flesh shall see b the salvation of God.’”
7[†]He said therefore to the crowds that came out to be baptized by him,
c “You brood of d vipers! Who warned you to flee from e the wrath to
come? 8[†]Bear fruits f in keeping with repentance. And do not begin to say
to yourselves, g ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you, God is able
from h these stones to raise up children for Abraham. 9[†]Even now the axe
is laid to the root of the trees. i Every tree therefore that does not bear good
fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.”
10[†]And the crowds asked him, j “What then shall we do?” 11[†]And he
answered them, k “Whoever has two tunics [2] is to share with him who has
none, and whoever has food is to do likewise.” 12[†] l Tax collectors also
came to be baptized and said to him, “Teacher, j what shall we do?” 13And
he said to them, m “Collect no more than you are authorized to do.”
14Soldiers also asked him, “And we, j what shall we do?” And he said to
them, m “Do not extort money from anyone by threats or by false
accusation, and be content with your n wages.”
15As the people were in expectation, and all were questioning in their
hearts concerning John, o whether he might be p the Christ, 16[†] q John
answered them all, saying, “I baptize you with water, but r he who is
mightier than I is coming, s the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to
untie. He will baptize you t with the Holy Spirit and u fire. 17[†]His
v winnowing fork is in his hand, to clear his threshing floor and to w gather
the wheat into his barn, x but the chaff he will burn with y unquenchable
fire.”
18[†]So z with many other exhortations he preached good news to the
people. 19But a Herod the tetrarch, who had been reproved by him for
Herodias, his brother’s wife, and for all the evil things that Herod had done,
20added this to them all, that b he locked up John in prison.
21[†]Now when all the people were baptized, and when c Jesus also had
been baptized and was praying, d the heavens were opened, 22[†]and e the
Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form, like a dove; and f a voice
came from heaven, g “You are my beloved Son; [3] with you I am well
pleased.” [4]
The Genealogy of Jesus Christ
23[†]Jesus, h when he began his ministry, was about i thirty years of age,
being j the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli, 24the son of
Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of
Joseph, 25the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son
of Esli, the son of Naggai, 26the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son
of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda, 27the son of Joanan, the son
of Rhesa, k the son of Zerubbabel, the son l of Shealtiel, [5] the son of Neri,
28the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of
Elmadam, the son of Er,
29the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of
Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, 30the son of Simeon, the son of
Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim, 31the son of
Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of m Nathan, the son
of David, 32 n the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of
Sala, the son of Nahshon, 33the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the
son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah, 34 o the
son of Jacob, p the son of Isaac, q the son of Abraham, r the son of Terah,
the son of Nahor,
35the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the
son of Eber, the son of Shelah, 36the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad,
the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech, 37the son of
Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the
son of Cainan, 38[†]the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the
son of God.
The Temptation of Jesus
LUKE 4 s And Jesus, t full of the Holy Spirit, u returned from the Jordan and
was led v by the Spirit in the wilderness 2[†]for w forty days, x being
tempted by the devil. w And he ate nothing during those days. And when
they were ended, y he was hungry.
3[†]The devil said to him, “If you are
z the Son of God, command a this stone to become bread.” 4And Jesus
answered him, b “It is written, c ‘Man shall not live by bread alone.’”
5[†] d And the devil took him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the
world in a moment of time, 6and said to him, “To you e I will give all this
authority and their glory, e for it has been delivered to me, and I give it to
whom I will. 7If you, then, will worship me, it will all be yours.” 8And
Jesus answered him, f “It is written,
g “‘You shall worship the Lord your God,
and h him only shall you serve.’”
9[†] i And he took him to Jerusalem and set him on the pinnacle of the
temple and said to him, “If you are j the Son of God, throw yourself down
from here, 10for it is written,
k “‘He will command his angels concerning you,
to guard you,’
11and
k “‘On their hands they will bear you up,
lest you strike your foot against a stone.’”
12And Jesus answered him, “It is said, l ‘You shall not m put the Lord your
God to the test.’” 13[†]And when the devil had ended every temptation, he
departed from him n until an opportune time.
Jesus Begins His Ministry
14 o And Jesus returned p in the power of the Spirit to Galilee, and q a report
about him went out through all the surrounding country.
15And r he taught
in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
Jesus Rejected at Nazareth
16[†] s And he came to t Nazareth, where he had been brought up. And u as
was his custom, v he went to the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and he
stood up w to read. 17[†]And x the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was given to
him. He unrolled the scroll and found the place where it was written,
18[†] y “The Spirit of the Lord z is upon me,
because he has anointed me
to a proclaim good news to the poor.
b He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives
and c recovering of sight to the blind,
d to set at liberty those who are oppressed,
19 e to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor.”
20And he rolled up the scroll and gave it back to the attendant and f sat
down. And the eyes of all in the synagogue were g fixed on him. 21And he
began to say to them, “Today h this Scripture i has been fulfilled in your
hearing.” 22And all spoke well of him and marveled at j the gracious words
that were coming from his mouth. And they said, k “Is not this l Joseph’s
son?” 23And he said to them, “Doubtless you will quote to me this proverb,
m ‘Physician, heal yourself.’ What we have heard you did n at Capernaum,
do here in your hometown as well.” 24[†]And he said, “Truly, I say to you,
o no prophet is acceptable in his hometown. 25[†]But in truth, I tell you,
there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when p the heavens
were shut up three years and six months, and a great famine came over all
the land, 26and Elijah was sent to none of them q but only to Zarephath, in
the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.
27And r there were many
lepers [1] in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, and none of them was
cleansed, s but only Naaman the Syrian.” 28[†]When they heard these
things, all in the synagogue were filled with wrath. 29And they rose up and
t drove him out of the town and brought him to the brow of the hill on
which their town was built, so that they could throw him down the cliff.
30[†]But u passing through their midst, he went away.
Jesus Heals a Man with an Unclean Demon
31 v And he w went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. And x he was
teaching them y on the Sabbath, 32[†]and z they were astonished at his
teaching, z for his word possessed authority.
33And x in the synagogue there
was a man who had the spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a
loud voice, 34[†]“Ha! [2] a What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth?
Have you come to destroy us? b I know who you are— c the Holy One of
God.” 35[†]But Jesus d rebuked him, saying, “Be silent and come out of
him!” And when the demon had thrown him down in their midst, he came
out of him, having done him no harm. 36[†]And e they were all amazed and
said to one another, “What is this word? e For with authority and power he
commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!” 37And f reports about
him went out into every place in the surrounding region.
Jesus Heals Many
38[†] g And he arose and left the synagogue and entered Simon’s house.
Now h Simon’s mother-in-law was ill with a high fever, and they appealed
to him on her behalf. 39And he stood over her and i rebuked the fever, and it
left her, and immediately she rose and began to serve them.
40[†]Now when the sun was setting, all those who had any who were sick
with various diseases brought them to him, and j he laid his hands on every
one of them and healed them. 41[†] k And demons also came out of many,
l crying, “You are m the Son of God!” But he rebuked them and k would not
allow them to speak, because they knew that he was n the Christ.
Jesus Preaches in Synagogues
42[†] o And when it was day, he departed and went p into a desolate place.
And q the people sought him and came to him, and would have kept him
from leaving them, 43but he said to them, r “I must s preach the good news
of the kingdom of God to the other towns as well; for I was sent for this
purpose.” 44And he was preaching t in the synagogues of Judea. [3]
Jesus Calls the First Disciples