MARK 6 [†] b He went away from there and came to c his hometown, and his
disciples followed him. 2And d on the Sabbath he began to teach in the
synagogue, and e many who heard him were astonished, saying, “Where did
this man get these things? What is the wisdom given to him? How are such
mighty works done by his hands? 3[†] f Is not this g the carpenter, the son of
Mary and h brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? And are not
his sisters here with us?” And i they took offense at him. 4[†]And Jesus said
to them, j “A prophet is not without honor, except in his hometown and
among his relatives and in his own household.” 5[†]And k he could do no
mighty work there, except that l he laid his hands on a few sick people and
healed them. 6And m he marveled because of their unbelief.
n And he went about among the villages teaching.
Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Apostles
7[†] o And he called the twelve and began to send them out two by two, and
gave them authority over the unclean spirits. 8[†]He charged them to take
nothing for their journey except a staff—no bread, no bag, no money in
their belts— 9but to p wear sandals and not put on two tunics. [1] 10And he
said to them, “Whenever you enter a house, stay there until you depart from
there. 11[†]And if any place will not receive you and they will not listen to
you, when you leave, q shake off the dust that is on your feet r as a
testimony against them.” 12 s So they went out and t proclaimed u that
people should repent. 13[†] t And they cast out many demons and v anointed
with oil many who were sick and healed them.
The Death of John the Baptist
14[†] w King Herod heard of it, for Jesus’ [2] name had become known.
Some [3] said, x “John the Baptist [4] has been raised from the dead. That is
why these miraculous powers are at work in him.” 15 x But others said, “He
is Elijah.” And others said, “He is y a prophet, like one of the prophets of
old.” 16But when Herod heard of it, he said, “John, whom I beheaded, has
been raised.” 17[†] z For it was Herod who had sent and seized John and
a bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife,
because he had married her.
18[†] z For John had been saying to Herod, b “It
is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.” 19[†]And Herodias had a
grudge against him and wanted to put him to death. But she could not, 20for
Herod c feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and he
kept him safe. When he heard him, he was greatly perplexed, and yet he
d heard him gladly.
21But an opportunity came when Herod e on his birthday f gave a banquet
for his nobles and military commanders and the leading men of Galilee.
22For when Herodias’s daughter came in and danced, she pleased Herod and
his guests. And the king said to the girl, “Ask me for whatever you wish,
and I will give it to you.” 23[†]And he vowed to her, “Whatever you ask me,
I will give you, g up to half of my kingdom.” 24And she went out and said
to her mother, “For what should I ask?” And she said, “The head of John
the Baptist.” 25And she came in immediately with haste to the king and
asked, saying, “I want you to give me at once the head of John the Baptist
on a platter.” 26And the king was exceedingly sorry, but because of his
oaths and his guests he did not want to break his word to her.
27And
immediately the king sent an executioner with orders to bring John’s [5]
head. He went and beheaded him in the prison 28and brought his head on a
platter and gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother.
29When his
h disciples heard of it, they came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
Jesus Feeds the Five Thousand
30[†] i j The apostles returned to Jesus and told him all that they had done
and taught. 31And he said to them, “Come away by yourselves to a desolate
place and rest a while.” For many were coming and going, and k they had
no leisure even to eat. 32
l And they went away in m the boat to a desolate
place by themselves. 33Now many saw them going and n recognized them,
and they ran there on foot from all the towns and got there ahead of them.
34[†]When he went ashore he o saw a great crowd, and o he had compassion
on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. And he began to
teach them many things. 35And when it grew late, his disciples came to him
and said, “This is a desolate place, and the hour is now late. 36[†] p Send
them away to go into the surrounding countryside and villages and buy
themselves something to eat.” 37But he answered them, q “You give them
something to eat.” And r they said to him, s “Shall we go and buy two
hundred denarii [6] worth of bread and give it to them to eat?” 38And he said
to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go and see.” And when they had
found out, they said, t “Five, and two fish.” 39Then he commanded them all
to sit down in groups on the green grass. 40So they sat down in groups, by
hundreds and by fifties. 41[†]And taking the five loaves and the two fish he
u looked up to heaven and v said a blessing and broke the loaves and gave
them to the disciples to set before the people. And he divided the two fish
among them all. 42And they all ate and were satisfied. 43[†]And they took
up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and of the fish. 44And those who ate
the loaves were five thousand men.
Jesus Walks on the Water
45[†] w Immediately he x made his disciples get into y the boat and go before
him to the other side, z to Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd. 46And
after he had taken leave of them, a he went up on the mountain to pray.
47And when b evening came, the boat was out on the sea, and he was alone
on the land. 48[†]And he saw that they were making headway painfully, for
the wind was against them. And about b the fourth watch of the night [7] he
came to them, walking on the sea. c He meant to pass by them, 49[†]but
when they saw him walking on the sea they thought it was a ghost, and
cried out, 50for they all saw him and d were terrified. But immediately he
spoke to them and said, e “Take heart; it is I. e Do not be afraid.” 51[†]And
he got into the boat with them, and the wind ceased. And they were utterly
astounded, 52for f they did not understand about the loaves, but their hearts
g were hardened.
Jesus Heals the Sick in Gennesaret
53[†] h When they had crossed over, they came to land at i Gennesaret and
moored to the shore. 54And when they got out of the boat, the people
immediately j recognized him 55and ran about the whole region and began
to bring k the sick people l on their beds to wherever they heard he was.
56And wherever he came, in villages, cities, or countryside, m they laid the
sick in the marketplaces and implored him that they might touch even n the
fringe of his garment. And o as many as touched it were made well.
Traditions and Commandments