MARK 16 [†] u v When the Sabbath was past, w Mary Magdalene, w Mary
the mother of James, and i Salome x bought spices, so that they might go
and anoint him. 2And very early on the first day of the week, when the sun
had risen, they went to the tomb. 3And they were saying to one another,
“Who will roll away y the stone for us from the entrance of the tomb?”
4And looking up, they saw that the stone had been rolled back— z it was
very large. 5[†]And a entering the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on
the right side, b dressed in c a white robe, and d they were alarmed. 6And he
said to them, d “Do not be alarmed. You seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was
crucified. He has risen; he is not here. See the place where they laid him.
7[†]But go, tell his disciples and Peter that e he is going before you to
Galilee. There you will see him, e just as he told you.” 8[†]And they went
out and fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had seized
them, and they said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.
[Some of the earliest manuscripts do not include 16:9–20.] [1]
Jesus Appears to Mary Magdalene
9[†][[Now when he rose early on the first day of the week, f he appeared
first to g Mary Magdalene, g from whom he had cast out seven demons.
10
h She went and told those who had been with him, i as they j mourned and
wept. 11But when they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her,
they k would not believe it.
Jesus Appears to Two Disciples
12 l After these things m he appeared in n another form to two of them, as
they were walking into the country.
13
o And they went back and told the
rest, but they did not believe them.
The Great Commission
14Afterward m he appeared p to the eleven themselves as they were reclining
at table, and he rebuked them for their q unbelief and r hardness of heart,
because s they had not believed those who saw him after he had risen.
15And he said to them, t “Go into all the world and u proclaim the gospel to
v the whole creation. 16
w Whoever believes and is x baptized y will be saved,
but z whoever w does not believe will be condemned. 17And a these signs
will accompany those who believe: b in my name they will cast out demons;
c they will speak in new tongues; 18
d they will pick up serpents with their
hands; and if they drink any deadly poison, it will not hurt them; e they will
lay their hands f on the sick, and they will recover.”
19So then the Lord Jesus, g after he had spoken to them, h was taken up
into heaven and i sat down at the right hand of God. 20And they went out
and preached everywhere, while j the Lord worked with them and
confirmed k the message l by accompanying signs.]]
}


{
Dedication to Theophilus