MATTHEW 14 [†] v At that time w Herod the tetrarch heard about the fame of
Jesus, 2and he said to his servants, x “This is John the Baptist. He has been
raised from the dead; that is why these miraculous powers are at work in
him.” 3[†]For y Herod had seized John and bound him and z put him in
prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, [1] 4because John
had been saying to him, a “It is not lawful for you to have her.” 5And
though he wanted to put him to death, b he feared the people, because they
held him to be c a prophet. 6But when Herod’s d birthday came, the
daughter of Herodias danced before the company and pleased Herod, 7so
that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she might ask.
8Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me the head of John the Baptist
here on a platter.” 9And the king was sorry, but because of his oaths and his
guests he commanded it to be given. 10He sent and had John beheaded in
the prison, 11and his head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, and
she brought it to her mother.
12[†]And e his disciples came and took the
body and buried it, and they went and told Jesus.
Jesus Feeds the Five Thousand
13Now when Jesus heard this, f he withdrew from there in a boat to a
desolate place by himself. But when the crowds heard it, they followed him
on foot from the towns. 14When he went ashore he g saw a great crowd, and
g he had compassion on them and healed their sick. 15[†]Now when it was
evening, the disciples came to him and said, “This is a desolate place, and
the day is now over; h send the crowds away to go into the villages and buy
food for themselves.” 16But Jesus said, “They need not go away; i you give
them something to eat.” 17They said to him, “We have only five loaves here
and two fish.” 18And he said, “Bring them here to me.” 19Then he ordered
the crowds to sit down on the grass, and taking the five loaves and the two
fish, j he looked up to heaven and k said a blessing. Then he broke the
loaves and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the
crowds. 20And they all ate and were satisfied. And they took up twelve
baskets full of the broken pieces left over.
21And those who ate were about
five thousand men, besides women and children.
Jesus Walks on the Water
22[†] l Immediately he m made the disciples get into the boat and go before
him to the other side, while he dismissed the crowds. 23And after he had
dismissed the crowds, n he went up on the mountain by himself to pray.
When o evening came, he was there alone, 24[†]but the boat by this time
was a long way [2] from the land, [3] beaten by the waves, for the wind was
against them. 25[†]And l in the fourth watch of the night he came to them,
walking on the sea. 26But when the disciples saw him walking on the sea,
p they were terrified, and said, “It is a ghost!” and they cried out in fear.
27[†]But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying, q “Take heart; it is I.
q Do not be afraid.”
28[†]And Peter answered him, “Lord, if it is you, command me to come
to you on the water.” 29He said, “Come.” So Peter got out of the boat and
r walked on the water and came to Jesus. 30But when he saw the wind, [4] he
was afraid, and beginning to sink he cried out, s “Lord, save me.” 31Jesus
immediately reached out his hand and took hold of him, saying to him, t “O
you of little faith, why did you u doubt?” 32And when they got into the boat,
s the wind ceased. 33And v those in the boat w worshiped him, saying,
x “Truly you are y the Son of God.”
Jesus Heals the Sick in Gennesaret
34[†] z And when they had crossed over, they came to land at a Gennesaret.
35[†]And when the men of that place recognized him, they sent around to all
that region and b brought to him all who were sick 36and implored him that
they might only touch c the fringe of his garment. And d as many as touched
it were made well.
Traditions and Commandments
MATTHEW 15 e Then Pharisees and f scribes came to Jesus f from Jerusalem
and said, 2[†] g “Why do your disciples break h the tradition of the elders?
j For they do not wash their hands when they eat.” 3[†]He answered them,
“And why do you break the commandment of God for the sake of your
tradition? 4For God commanded, k ‘Honor your father and your mother,’
and, l ‘Whoever reviles father or mother must surely die.’ 5[†]But you say,
‘If anyone tells his father or his mother, “What you would have gained from
me is given to God,” [1] 6[†]he need not honor his father.’ So for the sake of
your tradition you have m made void the word [2] of God. 7 n You hypocrites!
Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, when he said:
8
o “‘This people honors me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me;
9 in vain do they worship me,
teaching as p doctrines the commandments of men.’”
What Defiles a Person
10And he called the people to him and said to them, q “Hear and understand:
11[†] r it is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person, but what
comes out of the mouth; this defiles a person.” 12Then the disciples came
and said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees were s offended when
they heard this saying?” 13He answered, t “Every plant that my heavenly
Father has not planted u will be rooted up. 14[†]Let them alone; v they are
blind guides. [3] And w if the blind lead the blind, both will fall into a pit.”
15But Peter said to him, x “Explain the parable to us.” 16And he said, y “Are
you also still without understanding? 17[†]Do you not see that z whatever
goes into the mouth passes into the stomach and is expelled? [4] 18But
a what comes out of the mouth proceeds from the heart, and this defiles a
person. 19For out of the heart come b evil thoughts, c murder, adultery,
sexual immorality, theft, false witness, d slander.
20 e These are what defile a
person. But f to eat with unwashed hands does not defile anyone.”
The Faith of a Canaanite Woman
21 g And Jesus went away from there and withdrew to the district of Tyre
and Sidon. 22[†]And behold, h a Canaanite woman from that region came
out and was crying, i “Have mercy on me, O Lord, Son of David; my
daughter is severely oppressed by a demon.” 23But he did not answer her a
word. And his disciples came and begged him, saying, j “Send her away, for
she is crying out after us.” 24[†]He answered, k “I was sent only to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.” 25But she came and l knelt before him, saying,
“Lord, help me.” 26[†]And he answered, “It is not right to take the
children’s bread and m throw it to the dogs.” 27[†]She said, “Yes, Lord, yet
even the dogs eat n the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table.” 28Then
Jesus answered her, “O woman, o great is your faith! p Be it done for you as
you desire.” q And her daughter was p healed instantly. [5]
Jesus Heals Many
29
r Jesus went on from there and walked s beside the Sea of Galilee. And he
t went up on the mountain and sat down there. 30And great crowds came to
him, bringing with them u the lame, the blind, the crippled, the mute, and
many others, and they put them at his feet, and he healed them, 31
v so that
the crowd wondered, when they saw the mute speaking, w the crippled
healthy, the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And x they glorified y the
God of Israel.
Jesus Feeds the Four Thousand
32[†] z Then Jesus called his disciples to him and said, a “I have compassion
on the crowd because they have been with me now three days and have
nothing to eat. And I am unwilling to send them away hungry, lest they faint
on the way.” 33And the disciples said to him, “Where are we to get enough
bread in such a desolate place to feed so great a crowd?” 34[†]And Jesus
said to them, “How many loaves do you have?” They said, b “Seven, and a
few small fish.” 35[†]And directing the crowd to sit down on the ground,
36he took the seven loaves and the fish, and c having given thanks he broke
them and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the
crowds. 37And d they all ate and were satisfied. And they took up seven
baskets full of the broken pieces left over.
38Those who ate were four
thousand men, besides women and children. 39[†]And after sending away
the crowds, he got into the boat and went to the region of e Magadan.
The Pharisees and Sadducees Demand Signs