MATTHEW 13 [†]That same day Jesus went out of the house o and sat beside
the sea. 2And great crowds gathered about him, p so that he got into a boat
and sat down. And the whole crowd stood on the beach. 3[†]And q he told
them many things in parables, saying: r “A sower went out to sow.
4And as
he sowed, some seeds fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured
them. 5Other seeds fell on rocky ground, where they did not have much soil,
and immediately they sprang up, since they had no depth of soil, 6but
s when the sun rose they were scorched. And since they had no root, t they
withered away.
7Other seeds fell among u thorns, and the thorns grew up
and choked them. 8Other seeds fell on good soil and produced grain, some
v a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
9
w He who has ears, [1] let him
hear.”
The Purpose of the Parables
10[†]Then the disciples came and said to him, “Why do you speak to them
in parables?” 11And he answered them, x “To you it has been given to know
y the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given.
12[†] z For to the one who has, more will be given, and he will have an
abundance, but from the one who has not, a even what he has will be taken
away.
13This is why I speak to them in parables, because b seeing they do
not see, and hearing they do not hear, c nor do they understand. 14Indeed, in
their case the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled that says:
d “‘“You will indeed hear but never understand,
and you will indeed see but never perceive.”
15 For this people’s heart has grown dull,
and with their ears e they can barely hear,
and f their eyes they have closed,
lest they should see with their eyes
and hear with their ears
and g understand with their heart
and h turn, and I would heal them.’
16But i blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear.
17 i For truly, I say to you, j many prophets and righteous people longed to
see what you see, and did not see it, and to hear what you hear, and did not
hear it.
The Parable of the Sower Explained
18 k “Hear then the parable of the sower: 19When anyone hears the word of
l the kingdom and m does not understand it, n the evil one comes and
snatches away what has been sown in his heart. This is what was sown
along the path. 20As for what was sown on rocky ground, this is the one
who hears the word and immediately o receives it with joy,
21yet he has no
root in himself, but p endures for a while, and when tribulation or
persecution arises on account of the word, immediately q he falls away. [2]
22As for what was sown among thorns, this is the one who hears the word,
but r the cares of s the world and t the deceitfulness of riches choke the
word, and it proves unfruitful. 23As for what was sown on good soil, this is
the one who hears the word and m understands it. He indeed u bears fruit
and yields, in one case v a hundredfold, in another sixty, and in another
thirty.”
The Parable of the Weeds
24[†]He put another parable before them, saying, w “The kingdom of heaven
may be compared to a man who sowed good seed in his field, 25[†]but
while his men were sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds [3] among
the wheat and went away.
26So when the plants came up and bore grain,
then the weeds appeared also. 27And the servants [4] of the master of the
house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow good seed in your
field? How then does it have weeds?’ 28He said to them, ‘An enemy has
done this.’ So the servants said to him, ‘Then do you want us to go and
gather them?’ 29But he said, x ‘No, lest in gathering the weeds you root up
the wheat along with them. 30Let both grow together until the harvest, and
at harvest time I will tell the reapers, y Gather the weeds first and bind them
in bundles to be burned, but gather the wheat into my barn.’”
The Mustard Seed and the Leaven
31[†]He put another parable before them, saying, z “The kingdom of heaven
is like a a grain of mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his field. 32It
is the smallest of all seeds, but when it has grown it is larger than all the
garden plants and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and make
nests in its branches.”
33[†]He told them another parable. b “The kingdom of heaven is like
leaven that a woman took and hid in c three measures of flour, till it was
d all leavened.”
Prophecy and Parables
34
e All these things Jesus said to the crowds in parables; indeed, he said
nothing to them without a parable. 35This was to fulfill what was spoken by
the prophet: [5]
f “I will open my mouth in parables;
g I will utter what has been hidden h since the foundation of the
world.”
The Parable of the Weeds Explained
36Then he left the crowds and went into i the house. And his disciples came
to him, saying, j “Explain to us the parable of the weeds of the field.” 37He
answered, “The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man. 38The field
is the world, and the good seed is k the sons of the kingdom. The weeds are
l the sons of the evil one, 39[†]and the enemy who sowed them is the devil.
m The harvest is n the end of the age, and the reapers are angels. 40Just as
the weeds o are gathered and burned with fire, so will it be at n the end of
the age. 41[†] p The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather
out of his kingdom all q causes of sin and r all law-breakers, 42 s and throw
them into the fiery furnace. In that place t there will be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. 43[†]Then u the righteous will shine like the sun v in the
kingdom of their Father. w He who has ears, let him hear.
The Parable of the Hidden Treasure
44[†]“The kingdom of heaven x is like treasure hidden in a field, which a
man found and covered up. Then in his joy y he goes and sells all that he
has and z buys that field.
The Parable of the Pearl of Great Value
45[†]“Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of fine
pearls, 46who, on finding a one pearl of great value, y went and sold all that
he had and z bought it.
The Parable of the Net
47[†]“Again, the kingdom of heaven is b like a net that was thrown into the
sea and c gathered fish of every kind. 48When it was full, d men drew it
ashore and sat down and sorted the good into containers but threw away the
bad. 49So it will be at e the end of the age. The angels will come out and
f separate the evil from the righteous 50
g and throw them into the fiery
furnace. In that place g there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
New and Old Treasures
51[†] h “Have you understood all these things?” They said to him, “Yes.”
52And he said to them, “Therefore every i scribe j who has been trained for
the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house, who k brings out of his
treasure what is new and what is old.”
Jesus Rejected at Nazareth
53And when Jesus had finished these parables, he went away from there,
54[†] l and coming to m his hometown n he taught them in their synagogue,
so that o they were astonished, and said, “Where did this man get this
wisdom and these mighty works? 55[†] p Is not this q the carpenter’s son? Is
not his mother called Mary? And are not r his brothers James and Joseph
and Simon and Judas? 56And are not all his sisters with us? Where then did
this man get all these things?” 57And s they took offense at him. But Jesus
said to them, t “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown and
in his own household.” 58And he did not do many mighty works there,
u because of their unbelief.
The Death of John the Baptist