MATTHEW 24 [†] t Jesus left the temple and was going away, when his
disciples came to point out to him the buildings of the temple. 2[†]But he
answered them, “You see all these, do you not? Truly, I say to you, u there
will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down.”
Signs of the End of the Age
3[†]As he sat on v the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him
w privately, saying, “Tell us, x when will these things be, and what will be
the sign of your y coming and of z the end of the age?” 4And Jesus answered
them, a “See that no one leads you astray.
5For b many will come in my
name, saying, ‘I am c the Christ,’ and they will lead many astray.
6And you
will hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that you d are not alarmed, for
this e must take place, but the end is not yet. 7For f nation will rise against
nation, and g kingdom against kingdom, and there will be h famines and
earthquakes in various places. 8[†]All these are but the beginning of i the
birth pains.
9“Then j they will deliver you up k to tribulation and l put you to death,
and m you will be hated by all nations for my name’s sake. 10And then
many will fall away [1] and n betray one another and hate one another.
11And
many o false prophets will arise p and lead many astray.
12And because
lawlessness will be increased, q the love of many will grow cold. 13[†] r But
the one who endures to the end will be saved. 14And this gospel of the
kingdom s will be proclaimed throughout the whole world t as a testimony
u to all nations, and v then the end will come.
The Abomination of Desolation
15[†]“So when you see the abomination of desolation w spoken of by the
prophet Daniel, standing in x the holy place ( y let the reader understand),
16[†]then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. 17
z Let the one
who is on a the housetop not go down to take what is in his house, 18and let
the one who is in the field not turn back to take his cloak. 19And b alas for
women who are pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those
days! 20Pray that your flight may not be in winter or on a Sabbath. 21For
then there will be c great tribulation, d such as has not been from the
beginning of the world until now, no, and never will be. 22[†]And if those
days had not been cut short, no human being would be saved. But for e the
sake of the elect those days will be cut short. 23 f Then if anyone says to you,
‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘There he is!’ do not believe it. 24For g false
christs and h false prophets will arise and i perform great signs and
wonders, h so as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect. 25See, j I have
told you beforehand. 26So, if they say to you, ‘Look, k he is in the
wilderness,’ do not go out. If they say, ‘Look, he is in the inner rooms,’ do
not believe it. 27 l For as the lightning comes from the east and shines as far
as the west, so will be m the coming of the Son of Man. 28[†] n Wherever the
corpse is, there the vultures will gather.
The Coming of the Son of Man
29[†]“Immediately after o the tribulation of those days p the sun will be
darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and q the stars will fall from
heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken. 30[†]Then r will
appear in heaven s the sign of the Son of Man, and then t all the tribes of the
earth will mourn, and u they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds
of heaven v with power and great glory.
31[†]And w he will send out his
angels with a loud x trumpet call, and they will y gather z his elect from
a the four winds, b from one end of heaven to the other.
The Lesson of the Fig Tree
32“From the fig tree learn its lesson: as soon as its branch becomes tender
and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near.
33So also, when you
see all these things, you know that he is near, c at the very gates.
34[†] d Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these
things take place. 35[†] e Heaven and earth will pass away, but f my words
will not pass away.
No One Knows That Day and Hour
36[†]“But concerning that day and hour g no one knows, not even the angels
of heaven, h nor the Son, [2] i but the Father only.
37 j For as were the days of
Noah, k so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 38
j For as in those days
before the flood they were eating and drinking, l marrying and giving in
marriage, until m the day when Noah entered the ark, 39and they were
unaware until the flood came and swept them all away, k so will be the
coming of the Son of Man. 40[†]Then two men will be in the field; one will
be taken and one left. 41 n Two women will be grinding o at the mill; one
will be taken and one left. 42[†]Therefore, p stay awake, for you do not
know on what day q your Lord is coming. 43 r But know this, that if the
master of the house had known in what part of the night s the thief was
coming, he would have stayed awake and would not have let his house be
broken into. 44Therefore you also must be t ready, for u the Son of Man is
coming at an hour you do not expect.
45“Who then is v the faithful and w wise servant, [3] whom his master has
set over his household, to give them their food at the proper time?
46 x Blessed is that servant whom his master will find so doing when he
comes. 47Truly, I say to you, y he will set him over all his possessions.
48[†]But if that wicked servant says to himself, ‘My master z is delayed,’
49and begins to beat his fellow servants [4] and eats and drinks with
a drunkards, 50the master of that servant will come b on a day when he does
not expect him and at an hour he does not know 51and will cut him in pieces
and put him with the hypocrites. In that place c there will be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.
The Parable of the Ten Virgins