REVELATION 16 [†]Then I heard a loud voice from the temple telling p the
seven angels, “Go and q pour out on the earth r the seven bowls of the wrath
of God.”
2[†]So the first angel went and poured out his bowl on the earth, and
harmful and painful s sores came upon the people who bore t the mark of
the beast and worshiped its image.
3[†]The second angel poured out his bowl into the sea, and u it became
like the blood of a corpse, and v every living thing died that was in the sea.
4[†]The third angel poured out his bowl into w the rivers and the springs
of water, and x they became blood. 5And I heard the angel in charge of the
waters [1] say,
y “Just are you, z O Holy One, a who is and who was,
for you brought these judgments.
6 For b they have shed the blood of c saints and prophets,
and d you have given them blood to drink.
It is what they deserve!”
7And I heard e the altar saying,
“Yes, Lord God the Almighty,
f true and just are your judgments!”
8[†]The fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was allowed
to scorch people g with fire. 9They were scorched by the fierce heat, and
h they cursed [2] the name of God who had power over these plagues. i They
did not repent j and give him glory.
10[†]The fifth angel poured out his bowl on k the throne of the beast, and
l its kingdom was plunged into darkness. People gnawed their tongues in
anguish 11and cursed m the God of heaven for their pain and n sores. o They
did not repent of their deeds.
12[†]The sixth angel poured out his bowl on p the great river Euphrates,
and q its water was dried up, r to prepare the way for the kings s from the
east. 13And I saw, coming out of the mouth of t the dragon and out of the
mouth of u the beast and out of the mouth of v the false prophet, three
w unclean spirits like x frogs. 14For they are y demonic spirits, z performing
signs, who go abroad to the kings of the whole world, a to assemble them
for battle on b the great day of God the Almighty.
15[†](“Behold, c I am
coming like a thief! d Blessed is the one who stays awake, keeping his
garments on, e that he may not go about naked and be seen exposed!”)
16[†]And f they assembled them at the place that in Hebrew is called
g Armageddon.
The Seventh Bowl
17[†]The seventh angel poured out his bowl into h the air, and a loud voice
came out of the temple, from the throne, saying, i “It is done!” 18And there
were j flashes of lightning, rumblings, [3] peals of thunder, and k a great
earthquake l such as there had never been since man was on the earth, so
great was that earthquake. 19
m The great city n was split into three parts, and
the cities of the nations fell, and God o remembered p Babylon the great,
q to make her drain the cup of the wine of the fury of his wrath. 20And
r every island fled away, and no mountains were to be found. 21And s great
hailstones, about one hundred pounds [4] each, fell from heaven on people;
and t they cursed God for u the plague of the hail, because the plague was so
severe.
The Great Prostitute and the Beast