REVELATION 5 [†]Then I saw in the right hand of him who was seated on
the throne h a scroll written within and on the back, i sealed with seven
seals. 2And j I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is
worthy to open the scroll and break its seals?” 3And no one in heaven or on
earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it, 4and I
began to weep loudly because no one was found worthy to open the scroll
or to look into it. 5[†]And one of the elders said to me, “Weep no more;
behold, k the Lion l of the tribe of Judah, m the Root of David, has
conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals.”
6[†]And between the throne and the four living creatures and among the
elders I saw n a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain, with seven
horns and with o seven eyes, which are p the seven spirits of God sent out
into all the earth. 7And he went and took the scroll from the right hand of
him who was seated on the throne. 8[†]And when he had taken the scroll,
the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders q fell down before the
Lamb, r each holding a harp, and s golden bowls full of incense, t which are
the prayers of the saints. 9[†]And they sang u a new song, saying,
“Worthy are you to take the scroll
and to open its seals,
for v you were slain, and by your blood w you ransomed people for God
from x every tribe and language and people and nation,
10[†] and you have made them y a kingdom and priests to our God,
and they shall reign on the earth.”
11[†]Then I looked, and I heard around the throne and the living creatures
and the elders the voice of many angels, numbering z myriads of myriads
and thousands of thousands, 12saying with a loud voice,
a “Worthy is the Lamb who was slain,
to receive power and wealth and wisdom and might
and honor and glory and blessing!”
13[†]And I heard b every creature in heaven and on earth and under the
earth and in the sea, and all that is in them, saying,
“To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb
be blessing and honor and glory and might forever and ever!”
14And the four living creatures c said, “Amen!” and the elders d fell down
and worshiped.
The Seven Seals