REVELATION 17 [†]Then v one of the seven angels who had w the seven
bowls came and said to me, “Come, I will show you the judgment of x the
great prostitute y who is seated on many waters, 2[†] z with whom the kings
of the earth have committed sexual immorality, and a with the wine of
whose sexual immorality b the dwellers on earth have become drunk.”
3[†]And c he carried me away in the Spirit d into a wilderness, and I saw a
woman sitting on e a scarlet beast that was full of f blasphemous names, and
g it had seven heads and ten horns. 4[†]The woman h was arrayed in purple
and scarlet, and adorned i with gold and jewels and pearls, holding in her
hand j a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of her sexual
immorality.
5And on her forehead was written a name of k mystery:
l “Babylon the great, mother of prostitutes and of earth’s abominations.”
6[†]And I saw the woman, drunk m with the blood of the saints, the blood of
n the martyrs of Jesus. [1]
When I saw her, I marveled greatly.
7But the angel said to me, “Why do
you marvel? I will tell you o the mystery of the woman, and of the beast
with seven heads and ten horns that carries her.
8[†]The beast that you saw
p was, and is not, and q is about to rise from r the bottomless pit [2] and s go
to destruction. And t the dwellers on earth whose names have not been
written in u the book of life from the foundation of the world will marvel to
see the beast, because p it was and is not and is to come. 9[†] v This calls for
a mind with wisdom: the seven heads are seven mountains on which the
woman is seated; 10they are also seven kings, five of whom have fallen, one
is, the other has not yet come, and when he does come he must remain only
a little while. 11As for the beast w that was and is not, it is an eighth but it
belongs to the seven, and it goes to destruction. 12[†]And x the ten horns
that you saw are ten kings who have not yet received royal power, but they
are to receive authority as kings y for one hour, together with the beast.
13These are of one mind, and they hand over their power and authority to
the beast. 14They z will make war on the Lamb, and a the Lamb will
conquer them, for he is b Lord of lords and b King of kings, and those with
him are c called and chosen and faithful.”
15And the angel [3] said to me, d “The waters that you saw, where the
prostitute is seated, are peoples and multitudes and nations and languages.
16[†]And e the ten horns that you saw, they and the beast f will hate the
prostitute. They will make her g desolate and h naked, and i devour her flesh
and j burn her up with fire, 17for k God has put it into their hearts to carry
out his purpose by being of one mind and l handing over their royal power
to the beast, until the words of God are fulfilled. 18[†]And the woman that
you saw is m the great city that has dominion over the kings of the earth.”
The Fall of Babylon