REVELATION 20 [†]Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven,
n holding in his hand the key to o the bottomless pit [1] and a great chain.
2And he seized p the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil and
Satan, and q bound him for a thousand years, 3and threw him into o the pit,
and shut it and r sealed it over him, so that s he might not deceive the
nations any longer, until the thousand years were ended. After that he must
be released for a little while.
4[†]Then I saw t thrones, and u seated on them were those to whom the
authority to judge was committed. Also I saw v the souls of those who had
been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus and for the word of God, and
those w who had not worshiped the beast or its image and had not received
its mark on their foreheads or their hands. x They came to life and y reigned
with Christ for a thousand years. 5The rest of the dead did not come to life
until the thousand years were ended. This is the first resurrection.
6[†] z Blessed and holy is the one who shares in the first resurrection! Over
such a the second death has no power, but they will be b priests of God and
of Christ, and they c will reign with him for a thousand years.
The Defeat of Satan
7[†]And when the thousand years are ended, d Satan will be released from
his prison 8and will come out e to deceive the nations that are at the four
corners of the earth, f Gog and Magog, g to gather them for battle; their
number is like the sand of the sea. 9And h they marched up over the broad
plain of the earth and surrounded i the camp of the saints and j the beloved
city, but k fire came down from heaven [2] and consumed them, 10and the
devil l who had deceived them was m thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur
where n the beast and the false prophet were, and they will be tormented
day and night forever and ever.
Judgment Before the Great White Throne
11[†]Then I saw a great white throne and him who was seated on it. From
his presence o earth and sky fled away, and p no place was found for them.
12[†]And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and
q books were opened. Then another book was opened, which is r the book
of life. And s the dead were judged by what was written in the books,
t according to what they had done. 13[†]And the sea gave up the dead who
were in it, u Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and they
were judged, each one of them, t according to what they had done.
14[†]Then u Death and Hades v were thrown into the lake of fire. This is
w the second death, the lake of fire. 15And if anyone’s name was not found
written in the book of life, x he was thrown into the lake of fire.
The New Heaven and the New Earth