Offerings of the Leaders
7 Now it came to pass, when Moses had finished a setting up the tabernacle, that he b anointed it and consecrated it and all its furnishings, and the altar and all its utensils; so he anointed them and consecrated them.
2 Then c the leaders of Israel, the heads of their fathers’ houses, who were the leaders of the tribes and over those who were numbered, made an offering.
3 And they brought their offering before the Lord , six covered carts and twelve oxen, a cart for every two of the leaders, and for each one an ox; and they presented them before the tabernacle.
4 Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
5 “Accept these from them, that they may be used in doing the work of the tabernacle of meeting; and you shall give them to the Levites, to every man according to his service.”
6 So Moses took the carts and the oxen, and gave them to the Levites.
7 Two carts and four oxen d he gave to the sons of Gershon, according to their service;
8 e and four carts and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari, according to their service, under the authority of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
9 But to the sons of Kohath he gave none, because theirs was f the service of the holy things, g which they carried on their shoulders.
10 Now the leaders offered h the dedication offering for the altar when it was anointed; so the leaders offered their offering before the altar.
11 For the Lord said to Moses, “They shall offer their offering, one leader each day, for the dedication of the altar.”
12 And the one who offered his offering on the first day was i Nahshon the son of Amminadab, from the tribe of Judah.
13 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to j the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a k grain offering;
14 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of l incense;
15 m one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb n in its first year, as a burnt offering;
16 one kid of the goats as a o sin offering;
17 and for p the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
18 On the second day Nethanel the son of Zuar, leader of Issachar, presented an offering.
19 For his offering he offered one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
20 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
21 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
22 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
23 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Nethanel the son of Zuar.
24 On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, leader of the children of Zebulun, presented an offering.
25 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
26 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
27 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
28 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
29 and for the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.
30 On the fourth day q Elizur the son of Shedeur, leader of the children of Reuben, presented an offering.
31 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
32 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
33 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
34 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
35 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.
36 On the fifth day r Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, leader of the children of Simeon, presented an offering.
37 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
38 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
39 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
40 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
41 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
42 On the sixth day s Eliasaph the son of Deuel, leader of the children of Gad, presented an offering.
43 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
44 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
45 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as t a burnt offering;
46 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
47 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
48 On the seventh day u Elishama the son of Ammihud, leader of the children of Ephraim, presented an offering.
49 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
50 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
51 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
52 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
53 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.
54 On the eighth day v Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, leader of the children of Manasseh, presented an offering.
55 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
56 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
57 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
58 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
59 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
60 On the ninth day w Abidan the son of Gideoni, leader of the children of Benjamin, presented an offering.
61 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
62 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
63 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
64 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
65 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.
66 On the tenth day x Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, leader of the children of Dan, presented an offering.
67 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
68 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
69 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
70 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
71 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
72 On the eleventh day y Pagiel the son of Ocran, leader of the children of Asher, presented an offering.
73 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
74 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
75 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
76 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
77 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.
78 On the twelfth day z Ahira the son of Enan, leader of the children of Naphtali, presented an offering.
79 His offering was one silver platter, the weight of which was one hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering;
80 one gold pan of ten shekels, full of incense;
81 one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, as a burnt offering;
82 one kid of the goats as a sin offering;
83 and as the sacrifice of peace offerings: two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs in their first year. This was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.
84 This was aa the dedication offering for the altar from the leaders of Israel, when it was anointed: twelve silver platters, twelve silver bowls, and twelve gold pans.
85 Each silver platter weighed one hundred and thirty shekels and each bowl seventy shekels. All the silver of the vessels weighed two thousand four hundred shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary.
86 The twelve gold pans full of incense weighed ten shekels apiece, according to the shekel of the sanctuary; all the gold of the pans weighed one hundred and twenty shekels.
87 All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve young bulls, the rams twelve, the male lambs in their first year twelve, with their grain offering, and the kids of the goats as a sin offering twelve.
88 And all the oxen for the sacrifice of peace offerings were twenty-four bulls, the rams sixty, the male goats sixty, and the lambs in their first year sixty. This was the dedication offering for the altar after it was ab anointed.
89 Now when Moses went into the tabernacle of meeting ac to speak with Him, he heard ad the voice of One speaking to him from above the mercy seat that was on the ark of the Testimony, from ae between the two cherubim; thus He spoke to him.


Footnotes 
Numbers 7:2 Lit. who stood over
Numbers 7:8 Lit. hand
Numbers 7:42 Reuel, Num. 2:14

Cross references 
Verse 1:
  a: Ex. 40:17–33
  b: Lev. 8:10, 11
Verse 2:
  c: Num. 1:4
Verse 7:
  b: Num. 4:24–28
Verse 8:
  e: Num. 4:29–33
Verse 9:
  f: Num. 4:15
  g: Num. 4:6–14
Verse 10:
  h: Num. 7:1; Deut. 20:5; 1 Kin. 8:63; 2 Chr. 7:5, 9; Ezra 6:16; Neh. 12:27
Verse 12:
  a: Num. 2:3
Verse 13:
  j: Ex. 30:13
Verse 14:
  l: Ex. 30:34, 35
Verse 15:
  m: Lev. 1:2
  n: Ex. 12:5
Verse 16:
  o: Lev. 4:23
Verse 17:
  p: Lev. 3:1
Verse 30:
  q: Num. 1:5; 2:10
Verse 36:
  r: Num. 1:6; 2:12; 7:41
Verse 42:
  s: Num. 1:14; 2:14; 10:20
Verse 45:
  t: Ps. 40:6
Verse 48:
  u: Num. 1:10; 2:18; 1 Chr. 7:26
Verse 54:
  v: Num. 1:10; 2:20
Verse 60:
  w: Num. 1:11; 2:22
Verse 66:
  x: Num. 1:12; 2:25
Verse 72:
  y: Num. 1:13; 2:27
Verse 78:
  z: Num. 1:15; 2:29
Verse 84:
  a: Num. 7:10
Verse 88:
  b: Num. 7:1, 10
Verse 89:
  c: [Ex. 33:9, 11]; Num. 12:8
  d: Ex. 25:21, 22
  e: Ps. 80:1; 99:1