ECCLESIASTES 11:1
1023
14 j A fool also multiplies words.
No man knows what is to be;
Who can tell him k what will be after
him?
15 The labor of fools wearies them,
For they do not even know how to go
to the city!
16 l Woe to you, O land, when your king
is a child,
And your princes feast in the
morning!
17 Blessed are you, O land, when your
king is the son of nobles,
And your m princes feast at the
proper time—
For strength and not for
drunkenness!
18 Because of laziness the 7 building
decays,
Andn through idleness of hands the
house leaks.
19 A feast is made for laughter,
Ando wine makes merry;
But money answers everything.
20 p Do not curse the king, even in your
thought;
Do not curse the rich, even in your
bedroom;
For a bird of the air may carry your
voice,
And a bird in flight may tell the
matter.
The Value of Diligence
11bCast your bread a upon the waters,
bFor you will find it after many
days.
affairs, how can they be trusted when they express their
opinion about the hereafter?
10:16 Pity those with leaders so young or inexperienced that
they lose control over their areas of responsibility, or who
spend their nights banqueting into the early morning.
10:17 Useful nobility expresses itself in a sense of responsibil-
ity and deference to social order. This verse is an argument
for propriety. proper time: Here is Solomon’s case for modera-
tion and orderliness.
10:18 All forms of laziness bring houses and lives into disre-
pair.
10:19 money answers everything: Rather than being cynical
or critical about wealth or the rich, this comment is to be
taken in the context of the dissolute nobles (v. 16) and ban-
queters (v. 17). Wealth for them is only pleasure and a means
of having fun.
10:20 a bird of the air: We should watch what we say, for we
never know who is listening.
11:1 Cast your bread upon the waters: Verses 1–6 emphasize
the element of risk and uncertainty in commercial and agri-
cultural enterprises. Thus if the preceding proverbs in ch. 10
deal with royalty and leaders, these in vv. 1–6 deal with com-
mon people. Men and women must venture forth judiciously
1024 ECCLESIASTES 11:2
2 c Give a serving d to seven, and also to
eight,
e For you do not know what evil will
be on the earth.
3 If the clouds are full of rain,
They empty themselves upon the
earth;
And if a tree falls to the south or the
north,
In the place where the tree falls,
there it shall lie.
4 He who observes the wind will not
sow,
And he who regards the clouds will
not reap.
5 As f you do not know what is the way
of the 1 wind,
g Or how the bones grow in the womb
of her who is with child,
So you do not know the works of
God who makes everything.
6 In the morning sow your seed,
And in the evening do not withhold
your hand;
For you do not know which will
prosper,
Either this or that,
Or whether both alike will be good.
7 Truly the light is sweet,
And it is pleasant for the eyes h to
behold the sun;
8 But if a man lives many years
And i rejoices in them all,
Yet let him j remember the days of
darkness,
2 c Ps. 112:9; Matt.
5:42; Luke 6:30;
[1 Tim. 6:18, 19]
d Mic. 5:5 e Eph.
5:16
5 f John 3:8 g Ps.
139:14 1 Or spirit
7 h Eccl. 7:11
8 i Eccl. 9:7 j Eccl.
12:1
9 k Num. 15:39;
Job 31:7; Eccl.
2:10 l Eccl. 3:17;
12:14; [Rom.
14:10] 2 Impulses
3 As you see to
be best
10 4 vexation
m 2 Cor. 7:1; 2 Tim.
2:22 n Ps. 39:5
5 Prime of life
CHAPTER 12
1 a 2 Chr. 34:3;
Prov. 22:6; Lam.
3:27 b 2 Sam. 19:35
1 Lit. evil
For they will be many.
All that is coming is vanity.
Seek God in Early Life
9 Rejoice, O young man, in your youth,
And let your heart cheer you in the
days of your youth;
k Walk in the 2 ways of your heart,
And 3 in the sight of your eyes;
But know that for all these
l God will bring you into judgment.
10 Therefore remove 4 sorrow from your
heart,
Andm put away evil from your flesh,
n For childhood and 5 youth are vanity.
12Remem bera now your Creator in
the days of your youth,
Before the 1 difficult days come,
And the years draw near b when you
say,
“ I have no pleasure in them”:
2 While the sun and the light,
The moon and the stars,
Are not darkened,
And the clouds do not return after
the rain;
3 In the day when the keepers of the
house tremble,
And the strong men bow down;
When the grinders cease because
they are few,
And those that look through the
windows grow dim;
4 When the doors are shut in the
streets,
And the sound of grinding is low;
if they are ever to realize a gain, even though there is always
a certain amount of risk.
11:2 seven, and also to eight: This urges us to be generous to
as many as possible—and then some.
11:3 Regardless of which way a tree falls, someone is going to
get the use of its wood, so stop worrying that it did not fall on
your side (or even hoping that it will).
11:4 will not sow: The person who is so cautious that he must
wait for the ideal time before he makes a move is doomed
to fail.
11:5 Some works of God defy explanation. who makes every-
thing: The concept of God as Creator in Ecclesiastes is not
limited to 12:1. The inability of humans to know God’s works
apart from knowing Him is one of the themes of this book
(3:11; 8:17; 9:12).
11:6 which will prosper: Do not hold back from getting in-
volved. Let the success or failure of a task rest in the hand of
God—but get to the task.
11:7 light is sweet: An affirmation of the joy of life, despite all
the troubles that the book has presented.
11:8 remember the days of darkness: In appreciating the
opportunities of life, we must think more seriously about
death. This is contrasted with the joy of working while it is
still light.
11:9 If Solomon was the author of this book and wrote it late
in his life, then the point becomes even more clear. He was
speaking to young people (see Prov. 1:8; 2:1; 3:1), encouraging
them to learn the lessons that he had learned over the course
of his extraordinary life. Walk in the ways of your heart: This
verse is not an invitation to live sinfully in sensual pleasure
(as Num. 15:39 describes). Instead, it urges young people to
enjoy themselves completely while not forgetting that God
will review the quality of their life (3:17; 12:14).
11:10 Tragically, youth does not last; it too passes like a vapor.
We all seem to discover that “we get old too soon and smart
too late.”
12:1–8 Most interpreters have argued that this poem is an
allegory of old age. This is the view advocated here. Other
views include: (1) a description of a winter’s day as a meta-
phor of old age; (2) a description of people’s reaction to a fear-
ful thunderstorm; (3) the figure of a ruined house represent-
ing the failure of human efforts; and (4) the decay of a house
representing death and human frailty.
12:2 The person is losing his sight.
12:3 Verses 3–6 list the bodily infirmities that increasingly
hinder an older person from serving God. If the house stands
for the aging body, then the keepers are the arms and hands.
strong men bow down: The legs are bent in feebleness and
the knees cannot be depended on for support. grinders
cease: The teeth, now fewer than before, cannot chew the
food as well as they once did. those that look through the
windows grow dim: The eyes begin to lose their sight.
12:4 doors are shut in the streets: Just as the jaws of Levia-
than are called the “doors of his face” (Job 41:14), so the lips
When one rises up at the sound of
a bird,
And all c the daughters of music are
brought low.
5 Also they are afraid of height,
And of terrors in the way;
When the almond tree blossoms,
The grasshopper is a burden,
And desire fails.
For man goes to d his eternal home,
Ande the mourners go about the
streets.
6 Remember your Creator before the
silver cord is 2 loosed,
Or the golden bowl is broken,
Or the pitcher shattered at the
fountain,
Or the wheel broken at the well.
7 f Then the dust will return to the
earth as it was,
g And the spirit will return to God
h who gave it.
8 “ Vanityi of vanities,” says the Preacher,
“ All is vanity.”
4 c 2 Sam. 19:35
5 d Job 17:13
e Gen. 50:10; Jer.
9:17
6 2 So with Qr.,
Tg.; Kt. removed;
LXX, Vg. broken
7 f Gen. 3:19; Job
34:15; Ps. 90:3
g Eccl. 3:21 h Num.
16:22; 27:16; Job
34:14; Is. 57:16;
Zech. 12:1
8 i Ps. 62:9
9 j 1 Kin. 4:32
3 arranged
10 4 Lit. delightful
11 5 Lit. masters
of assemblies
12 k Eccl. 1:18
13 l [Deut. 6:2;
10:12]; Mic. 6:8
14 m Eccl. 11:9;
Matt. 12:36; [Acts
17:30, 31; Rom.
2:16; 1 Cor. 4:5;
2 Cor. 5:10]
ECCLESIASTES 12:14
1025
The Whole Duty of Man
9 And moreover, because the Preach-
er was wise, he still taught the people
knowledge; yes, he pondered and sought
out and j set 3 in order many proverbs.
10 The Preacher sought to find 4 ac cept-
able words; and what was written was
upright—words of truth. 11 The words of
the wise are like goads, and the words of
5 scholars are like well-driven nails, given
by one Shepherd. 12 And further, my son,
be admonished by these. Of making many
books there is no end, and k much study is
wearisome to the flesh.
13 Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter:
14 l Fear God and keep His
commandments,
For this is man’s all.
For m God will bring every work into
judgment,
Including every secret thing,
Whether good or evil.
and jaws are possibly intended here. sound of grinding is low:
A depiction of toothless old age when eating only soft foods
makes little or no noise. daughters of music are brought low:
The ability to hear—and thus the ability to make and enjoy
music—wanes.
12:5 afraid of height: Things that used to be a regular part of
life now become threatening. almond tree blossoms: Hair
turns white. grasshopper is a burden: This may refer to the
halting step of the elderly as they hobble along on their
canes. desire fails: This is generally understood as a refer-
ence to a vanishing sexual desire. Then comes death: eternal
home.
12:6 Some suggest that silver cord refers to the spinal cord.
golden bowl is broken: This may refer to the brain. pitcher
shattered at the fountain: One suggestion is that this is a fail-
ing heart. wheel broken at the well: The system of veins and
arteries radiating out from the heart might have appeared to
the ancients like the spokes on a wheel. An alternative expla-
nation of this verse is that each of the four images represents
death. That is, there is no physical representation intended
in these images as in those of vv. 3–5. Instead, this verse de-
scribes the destruction of four significant objects—a demon-
stration of the finality of this life.
12:7 dust will return: These words refer clearly to the univer-
sal fate of the descendants of Adam and Eve. spirit will re-
turn: This is a clear allusion to Gen. 2:7. The term spirit is the
same used in earlier passages (3:19, 21; 8:8).
12:8 The refrain of vanity—the brevity of life—is here repeat-
ed. It is possible that the book originally ended with these
words.
12:9 Early on in his book, the Preacher speaks of his pursuit
of wisdom (1:12—2:26). It is possible that he speaks of himself
here in the third person (as in 1:1, 2). Probably it was an edi-
tor under the guiding hand of God who wrote these evalua-
tions of Solomon, much as Joshua or some other editor wrote
an evaluation of Moses under the influence of God’s Spirit
(Deut. 34). pondered . . . sought out . . . set in order: The three
verbs that describe Solomon’s activity may also be translated
“weighed . . . examined . . . and arranged.”
12:10 The Preacher devotes special care to write acceptable
words—pleasant words, words of grace—and words of truth.
The truth referred to here is the truth from God.
12:11 Just as an ox goad prods an animal in the right direc-
tion, so will the words of this book when they are properly
understood. well-driven nails: The nails, or “pegs,” referred
to here are the same as in 2 Chr. 3:9; Jer. 10:4. These are hooks
in tents where families hung the clothes and pots needed for
everyday life. Here they refer to mental hooks giving stability
and perspective to life. by one Shepherd: Kings were typically
compared to shepherds, and Solomon is claiming that the
source of his ideas is God, the Shepherd of Israel (Ps. 80:1).
12:12 Many other books may weary their readers. Careful
study of Ecclesiastes will have the opposite effect as it in-
structs, warns, and admonishes its readers.
12:13 To fear God is one of the major themes of this book and
of wisdom literature in the OT. To fear God is to respond to
Him in awe, reverence, and wonder, to serve Him in purity of
action, and to shun evil and any worship of anything else in
His universe. keep His commandments: The commandments
of the Law are in view here. Jesus summed them up as to “love
the Lord your God” and “your neighbor as yourself” (Matt.
22:34–40). man’s all: We are whole or complete only when we
fear God and obey His commandments. What profit is there
in living? If we follow what this book has said, we will have a
relationship with God and find life in Him.
12:14 judgment: This same teaching is echoed by the apostle
Paul in 2 Cor. 5:10. Death is not the end. All of life will be re-
viewed by our righteous Lord (see at 3:17). Life must be lived
through faith with the values of the eternal God in view.




The
Song of Solomon
The Song of Solomon is a moving love story between a young country girl and King Solomon.
In delicate poetry, the lovers express intense passion and deep longing for each other. The young
girl compares her love for her husband to the anticipation of a frantic search, while Solomon likens
his bride’s beauty to picturesque gardens and delicious fruit. Yet even in this eloquent expression of
the passion between a bride and bridegroom, there is an exhortation to remain sexually pure before
marriage (2:7). In this way, the book celebrates human sexuality within the context of marriage.
The book has not always been understood in this way. Jewish scholars around the time of the
birth of Christ interpreted the book allegorically, stating that it describes the love of God for Israel.
Similarly, some Christians have taught that the book speaks of the mystical relationship of the Lord
Jesus Christ and His bride, the church.
However, one does not need to get into allegorical meanings to understand this book. The Song
of Solomon celebrates the beauty and intimacy of married love in a narrative poem. It teaches that
a lasting marriage requires dedication, commitment, and strong loyalty between husband and wife.
The Song also presents an idealized picture of how human love can be expressed under God’s
blessing. This is a very important issue. Some critics have claimed that Christianity’s standards for
marriage ignore or undervalue sexual relationships. But the Song of Solomon refutes this. It reiter-
ates the biblical admonition against sex outside of marriage, but it also affi rms that God not only
approves of, but also encourages, sexual pleasure within marriage.
Author • The author of the Song of Solomon is Solomon, the son of David and the third king of
Israel. He is named as the author and his name appears seven times in the book (1:1, 5; 3:7, 9, 11;
8:11, 12). Even so, some have argued that the references to Solomon may be only a stylistic device
and the author may have been from a later period. The arguments for this are inconclusive. But the
fact that Solomon was known for his wisdom and poetry (see 1 Kin. 4:29–34) partially substantiates
his authorship of this book.
Literary Form • Perhaps nowhere in the Bible is the literary culture of the Middle East more
apparent than in this book. The genre or literary form of the Song of Solomon is unique in the Bible.
It is a lyric idyll, a type of love song. As in the case of the Book of Job, the Song of Solomon reveals its
treasures to the patient reader who approaches the book on its own terms, searching for and medi-
tating on its meaning. The form of the lyric idyll displays two features. The fi rst is that speeches and
events do not necessarily follow in chronological order. At times the story line remains suspended
while the audience views scenes from earlier or yet untold incidents.
A second feature of the lyric idyll is the use of the chorus. In addition to the two characters that
carry the story line—the Shulamite and King Solomon, a group of women interrupt certain scenes
with brief musical speeches or warnings. Solomon uses the chorus to make transitions from one
scene to another, as well as to add emphasis to important themes.
Historical Background • The Song of Solomon retells the romance between King Solomon, the
richest king ever to rule Israel, and his beloved bride, who came from a small village in the region of
Galilee. Solomon owned vineyards all over the nation. One was close to Baal Hamon in the north-
ernmost part of Galilee near the foothills of the mountains of Lebanon. On one of his visits to this
vineyard, Solomon met a young woman. Strangely we never learn her name. She is called simply the
SONG OF SOLOMON INTRODUCTION
1027
Shulamite. For some time he pursued her and made periodic visits to her country home to see her.
Finally, he proposed. The Shulamite gave much thought to whether she really loved Solomon and
could be happy in the palace of a king. Finally she accepted.
Theology • If the Bible is the book about God, then one may well ask what a narrative about hu-
man sexuality has to do with theology. This is an even more potent question when one observes that
God is never mentioned in the entire text (except possibly in 8:6) nor are there any references to
prayer, worship, or piety. In this respect it bears similarities to the Book of Esther, which also does
not mention God. Nevertheless, Esther is a story of the redemption of God’s people and includes
episodes of prayer, fasting, and thanksgiving. Such themes are notably absent from Solomon’s poetic
story, making it unique among the books of the Bible.
To resolve this diffi culty, it is important to remember that the Bible not only describes who God is
and what God does, it also tells us what God desires for His people. The Song of Solomon provides
an example of how God created male and female to live in happiness and fulfi llment. People are
created as sexual beings. It would be wrong to suggest that the full experience of our humanity is
impossible apart from sexual union in marriage, since this would disqualify the widowed, divorced,
and the celibate—including our Savior who was celibate. At the same time, God ordained marriage
from the beginning of creation: Man and woman were to become one fl esh (Gen. 2:25).
Because of its emphasis on human love, this book presents an extraordinary variety of expres-
sions for love, perhaps the richest selection in all Hebrew Scripture. But within this celebration of
love, the book condemns unchaste relations outside of marriage—and in particular, sexual experi-
mentation before marriage. Indeed, this book may contain the Bible’s strongest argument for chas-
tity before marriage. Ironically because of its explicit language, ancient and modern Jewish sages
forbade men to read the book before they were 30 (and presumably kept women from reading it at
all). We cannot ignore the sexual content of the book, but we can appreciate the context in which
it is placed—a godly marriage. The Song of Solomon is necessary reading not only for the married,
but for young people who want to understand God’s design for marriage.
Christ in the Scriptures
Just as some of the psalms have a contemporary application as well as a future-oriented one,
so the entire Song of Solomon has three levels of fulfi llment. The encounters and affectionate ex-
changes between Solomon and his bride are passionate poetry documenting human love. But the
king also illustrates God’s love for the people of God over whom he rules. And Solomon’s ornamen-
tal language also prefi gures the delight and joy Jesus has for His Bride and His unconditional com-
mitment to His church. In the NT, the followers of Jesus are seen as the personifi ed object of His
love (2 Cor. 11:2; Eph. 5:23–25; Rev. 19:7–9; 21:9).
Song of Solomon Outline
I. II. Three refl ections on the wedding day 1:2—2:7
A. In the palace 1:2–8
B. At the banquet table 1:9–14
C. In the bridal chamber 1:15—2:7
Three refl ections during the courtship days 2:8—3:5
A. A springtime visit 2:8–14
B. Catching the little foxes 2:15–17
C. A dream of separation 3:1–5
1028