ISAIAH 66:24
b All flesh shall come to worship
before Me,” says the LORD.
24 “ And they shall go forth and look
Upon the corpses of the men
23 b Zech.
14:17-21
24 c Is. 14:11;
Mark 9:44, 46, 48
Who have transgressed against Me.
For their c worm does not die,
And their fire is not quenched.
They shall be an abhorrence to all
flesh.”
66:24 Corpses refers to the rebels (5:25; 34:3). The word for
transgressed is related to the word for rebelled in 1:2. Their
worm . . . is not quenched depicts eternal punishment (48:22;
57:20). The imagery derives from the Valley of Hinnom that
was Jerusalem’s garbage dump, where unclean corpses de-
composed and were burned. This verse is cited by Jesus in
Mark 9:44, 46, 48. Although the Book of Isaiah depicts God’s
coming salvation, it closes with a strong statement of the
judgment of the wicked.




The Book of
Jeremiah
The Book of Jeremiah, perhaps more vividly than any other book of the Bible, reveals the in-
ner struggles of a prophet of God. In “confessions” such as those in 15:10–21; 20:7–18, Jeremiah
candidly reveals his inner turmoil concerning his call to prophetic ministry. Indeed, the prophet’s
anguish over the message of judgment upon his people and the coming destruction of the land
was at times overwhelming (4:19–22). Yet despite his anguish, Jeremiah fulfi lled his ministry of
proclaiming God’s judgment against the people of Judah for their idolatry, their unfaithfulness to
the covenant, and their obstinate disobedience of His will. Long acknowledged as one of the great
prophets of the Old Testament, Jeremiah serves to this day as an example of someone who remained
faithful to the word of God despite countless hardships.
Author and Date • Jeremiah was born in Anathoth, just three miles northeast of Jerusalem in
the hill country of Benjamin. His father was Hilkiah. Jeremiah’s ministry extended from 626 to 586
B.C., making him a contemporary of Zephaniah, Ezekiel, and Habakkuk. The prophet’s writing min-
istry began in the fourth year of Jehoiakim’s reign in 605 B.C. (see 36:1, 2), though portions of the
book may have been written earlier. The book was completed sometime after the fall of Jerusalem
in 586 B.C.
Historical Setting • Jeremiah’s ministry covered a very critical time in the history of the an-
cient Middle East. When Josiah king of Judah died at the hands of the Egyptian army, Judah be-
came subject to Egypt and its ruler Pharaoh Necho. The people of Judah chose Jehoahaz to succeed
Josiah. However, three months later Necho appointed Jehoiakim (Eliakim) to rule as his vassal on
the throne in Jerusalem. Having lost their freedom, the people of Judah turned not to God but to
the idols they had worshiped in the days of Manasseh and Amon. This idolatry was the reason for
Jeremiah’s proclamations of God’s judgment.
In 605 B.C. Nebuchadnezzar defeated Pharaoh Necho at Carchemish, and Jehoiakim immedi-
ately submitted to the Babylonian king, who permitted him to remain on the throne as a vassal.
Three years later, Jehoiakim rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar and was deposed (see 2 Kin. 24:1,
2). Jehoiachin replaced Jehoiakim on the throne for a short time, but he was then exiled to Babylon
by Nebuchadnezzar. Thousands of political and religious leaders were carried to Babylon with
Jehoiachin in 597 B.C. (see 2 Kin. 24:14–16).
Nebuchadnezzar made Jehoiakim’s brother Zedekiah the new ruler of Judah. In 589 B.C., Zedekiah
led a rebellion against Babylon, and Nebuchadnezzar’s reprisal was swift. His army entered Judah
and destroyed all resisting fortifi ed settlements. Nebuchadnezzar’s army turned aside from besieg-
ing Jerusalem when the Egyptian army appeared in southwest Palestine in the summer of 588 B.C.
But the Egyptians soon withdrew, and Nebuchadnezzar resumed his siege. Several times during the
siege of Jerusalem, Zedekiah came to Jeremiah for counsel from the Lord. The prophet advised him
to surrender, but Zedekiah would not listen.
Jerusalem’s walls were breached in the fourth month of 586 B.C. One month later, the temple was
burned, along with the palaces, houses, and other administrative buildings. An additional 4,600
Jerusalemites were deported to Babylon. Gedaliah was appointed governor of Judah at Riblah.
Jeremiah, who had been imprisoned by Zedekiah, was released and sent to serve under Gedaliah.
Gedaliah was assassinated and his supporters fl ed to Egypt, fearful of Nebuchadnezzar’s revenge.
Jeremiah went with them to Egypt against his will, and there he continued to confront the Jews for
their idolatry and unfaithfulness.
1146
JEREMIAH INTRODUCTION
640 b.c.
Josiah becomes
king in Judah
626 b.c.
Jeremiah
is called to
prophesy
612 b.c.
Assyria falls to
the Babylonians
and Medes
609 b.c.
Jehoahaz’s reign
begins in Judah
Structure • The structure and organization of the Book of Jeremiah have perplexed interpreters
for generations. A brief examination of passages with explicit historical notes proves that the mate-
rial is not ordered chronologically. Instead, the organization of the oracles,
prose sermons, and other material is based on content, audience, and con-
nective links. The division is as follows: (1) the call of Jeremiah (ch. 1);
(2) the judgment of Judah and Jerusalem (chs. 2—24); (3) Jeremiah’s min-
istry to the nations (chs. 25—51); (4) an historical appendix recounting
722 b.c.
Israel is
conquered by
the Assyrians
the fall of Jerusalem (ch. 52). This arrangement gives balance and unity to
the lengthy prophetic text.
Message • Jeremiah’s prayers, confessions, laments, and dialogues
reveal the depth of the prophet’s understanding of the character of God
and the nature of His relationship to people. For Jeremiah, the God of
Israel was the incomparable God of all creation, the Lord over nature and
history. He reigned not only over Judah and Israel but over all nations
(25:13).
The thread that wove together Jeremiah’s knowledge of God was his
understanding of the word of God. It permeated the prophet’s life and
speech, for God Himself promised to touch Jeremiah’s mouth and infuse
His words into Jeremiah’s mind and speech (1:9). From then on, God’s
words were like an unquenchable fi re burning within the prophet’s soul
(20:9).
Jeremiah was keenly aware of the provisions of the covenant between
God and Israel. The covenant bound Israel to God in a special relationship
of love, faithfulness, and hope. But the covenant had two sides. Faithfulness
to the Lord and the covenant would bring blessing; disobedience would
result in punishment, destruction, and exile (see Deut. 27:14—28:68).
Jeremiah called the people to obey the words of the covenant and to turn
from their idolatry and their unjust treatment of one another (11:6, 7).
Jeremiah’s message of judgment also contained a word of hope: a righ-
teous remnant would be restored. The land had been defi led by the peo-
ple’s idolatry. The leaders had brought the nation to the brink of disaster
and the people were exiled. But based on His everlasting love for Israel,
God promised to bring the people back from captivity and restore them to
blessing (30:18—31:6). Israel’s enemies would be defeated (30:16), and
the people would sing joyfully of God’s goodness (31:12).
Christ in the Scriptures
Although Jeremiah’s references to Jesus are not as numerous as
Isaiah’s, they are equally as strong. He paints a word picture of the Messiah
in 23:1–8 in which we see Him as the coming Shepherd, righteous Branch,
and a King who “shall reign and prosper, and execute judgment and righ-
teousness in the earth . . . now this is His name by which He will be called:
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS” (23:5, 6).
But Jeremiah doesn’t stop there. He writes of one who “will make a
new covenant” (31:31–34). This is the same one who will fulfi ll God’s cov-
enants with Abraham (Gen. 12:1–3; 17:1–8), with Moses and the people
(Deut. 28—30), and with David (2 Sam. 7:1–17).
608 b.c.
Jehoiakim’s reign
begins in Judah
605 b.c.
Nebuchad-
nezzar’s reign
begins in
Babylon
598 b.c.
Jehoiachin
becomes king in
Judah
598 b.c.
Zedekiah
becomes Judah’s
last king
586 b.c.
Jerusalem falls to
the Babylonians
585 b.c.
Jeremiah is taken
to Egypt