MICAH 7:20
1427
19 He will again have compassion on us,
And will subdue our iniquities.
You will cast all 2 our sins
Into the depths of the sea.
20 g You will give truth to Jacob
And 3 mercy to Abraham,
h Which You have sworn to our fathers
From days of old.
19 2 Lit. their
20 g Luke 1:72, 73 $ h Ps. 105:9 3 Or lovingkindness
7:18 Who is a God like You: These words speak of the incompa-
rability of God. There is nothing in all of creation to compare
with God (see Is. 40:25). Pardoning iniquity: These words come
from the revelation of God to Moses in Ex. 34:6–9.
7:20 This last verse is reminiscent of God’s promise to Abra-
ham in Gen. 12; 15; 22 and His promises to Jacob in Gen. 32.
The Lord had sworn to fulfill His promises to the patriarchs.
He would not—He could not—leave His promise unfulfilled
(see Ps. 89:33).
compassion (Heb. racham) (7:19; Ex. 33:19; Prov. 28:13) Strong’s #7355: The Hebrew word translated here as compassion
means “to love from the womb” and is frequently translated mercy (Is. 14:1). The noun form of this verb means “womb,” and
consequently this verb depicts the tender love of a mother for her own helpless child (1 Kin. 3:26). “From the womb” speaks
of the depth of emotion associated with this expression of love. God loves His people with a deep compassion and love that
is almost beyond description. God used a form of this Hebrew word to reveal His character and name to Moses: “And the
Lord passed before him and proclaimed, ‘The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abounding in
goodness and truth’ ” (see Ex. 34:6).




The Book of
Nahum
722 b.c.
Israel is taken
captive by the
Assyrians
This is the second of two books of the minor prophets that centers on Nineveh, the capital city
of Assyria. In the Book of Jonah, written in the eighth century B.C., we behold a man of God who
was called to preach to Nineveh. He was one of the few prophets who despaired when his listeners
heeded his warning. The people of Nineveh repented, and God demonstrated his great compassion
by not judging the city. In the Book of Nahum, written in the seventh century B.C., we fi nd another
prophet called by God to preach to Nineveh. Evil again reigned in the capital. Tragically, the people
of Nineveh this time ignored Nahum’s warning.
Author and Date • Nahum, the author of this book, is not known apart from the three chapters
of this prophecy. Even the location of the place of his birth, Elkosh (1:1), is in doubt. However, since
Nahum wrote considerably after the destruction of Israel in 722 B.C., we may assume that Elkosh
was in Judah.
The fall of Thebes in 663 B.C. (3:8) determines the limit for the earliest date of the book. The fall
of Nineveh, which the book predicts, took place in 612 B.C., not long before the fi nal destruction
of the Assyrian Empire in 609 B.C. This means the Book of Nahum was
composed sometime before 612 B.C. perhaps under the reform of Josiah in
622 B.C.
Historical Context • The people of the northern kingdom of Israel
had been sinning grievously against God and ignoring the warnings of
punishment given through God’s prophets. Finally God used the nation of
Assyria, with its capital city in Nineveh, to destroy the nation and carry
the people into captivity. A century after the fall of Samaria in 722 B.C.,
the Book of Nahum was written to express a major truth of the prophets.
Even when God uses a nation for His own purposes of judgment, this
does not excuse that nation from its own guilt before the Lord. It was
Nineveh’s turn to feel the wrath of God. The last great emperor of Assyria
was Ashurbanipal (669–627 B.C.). After his death, the nation did not last
much longer, for the Lord was against it (2:13; 3:3).
Theology • How does the mood of the Book of Nahum accord with the
sentiment of the Sermon on the Mount? Although the Lord Jesus certainly
spoke of loving one’s enemies (see Matt. 5:43–48), He strongly warned
of the inevitability of judgment (see Matt. 5:21, 29, 30; 7:13, 23). He said
that “all who take the sword will perish by the sword” (see Matt. 26:52). If
ever the words of Jesus concerning the sure destruction of those who live
by violence had a direct application, it was to Nineveh. In the conquest of
the ancient world, the Assyrians were merciless and cruel. Their atroci-
ties included everything from burning children to death to chopping off
hands. In many ways, the Book of Nahum is a theology of the maxim of
the sword. Nineveh had an international reputation for bloodthirsty acts
of repression, destruction, and wantonness. God could not be good if He
failed to call such an evil nation to account. The theology of the Book of
669 b.c.
Ashurbanipal’s
reign begins in
Assyria
663–654 b.c.
Assyria occupies
Egypt’s capital
Thebes (No
Amon)
622 b.c.
Revival in
Jerusalem under
Josiah
612 b.c.
Nineveh falls to
the Medes and
Babylonians
605 b.c.
Nebuchad-
nezzar’s reign
begins in
Babylon