1 CHRONICLES 28 [†] i David assembled at Jerusalem all the officials of
Israel, the j officials of the tribes, the officers of the divisions that served the
king, the k commanders of thousands, the commanders of hundreds, the
l stewards of all the property and livestock of the king and his sons, together
with the palace officials, the m mighty men and all the seasoned warriors.
2Then King David rose to his feet and said: “Hear me, my brothers and my
people. n I had it in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the
covenant of the LORD and for the o footstool of our God, and I made
preparations for building. 3But God said to me, p ‘You may not build a
house for my name, for you are a man of war and have shed blood.’ 4[†]Yet
the LORD God of Israel q chose me from all my father’s house to be king
over Israel r forever. s For he chose Judah as leader, and in the house of
Judah my father’s t house, and among my father’s sons he took pleasure in
me to make me king over all Israel. 5And of u all my sons (for the LORD has
given me many sons) he v has chosen Solomon my son to sit on the throne
of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel. 6[†]He said to me, ‘It is w Solomon
your son who shall build my house and my courts, for I have chosen him to
be my son, and I will be his father.
7[†]I will establish his kingdom r forever
x if he continues strong in keeping my commandments and my rules, as he
is today.’ 8Now therefore in the sight of all Israel, the assembly of the LORD,
and in the hearing of our God, observe and seek out all the commandments
of the LORD your God, that you may possess this good land and leave it for
an inheritance to your children after you forever.
David’s Charge to Solomon
9“And you, Solomon my son, know the God of your father and serve him
with a y whole heart and with a willing mind, z for the LORD searches all
hearts and understands every plan and thought. a If you seek him, he will be
found by you, but if you forsake him, he will cast you off forever.
10Be
careful now, for the LORD has chosen you to build a house for the sanctuary;
b be strong and do it.”
11[†]Then David gave Solomon his son the c plan of the d vestibule of the
temple, [1] and of its houses, its treasuries, its upper rooms, and its inner
chambers, and of the room for the e mercy seat; 12and the plan of all that he
had in mind for the courts of the house of the LORD, all the surrounding
chambers, f the treasuries of the house of God, and the treasuries for
dedicated gifts; 13for the g divisions of the priests and of the h Levites, and
all the work of the service in the house of the LORD; for all the vessels for
the service in the house of the LORD,
14the weight of gold for all golden
vessels for each service, the weight of silver vessels for each service, 15the
weight of the golden i lampstands and their lamps, the weight of gold for
each lampstand and its lamps, the weight of silver for a lampstand and its
lamps, according to the use of each lampstand in the service, 16the weight
of gold for each table for the showbread, the silver for the silver tables,
17and pure gold for the forks, the basins and the cups; for the golden bowls
and the weight of each; for the silver bowls and the weight of each; 18for
the j altar of incense made of refined gold, and its weight; also his plan for
the golden chariot of the k cherubim that spread their wings and covered the
ark of the covenant of the LORD.
19[†]“All this he made clear to me in
writing from the hand of the LORD, l all the work to be done according to
the plan.”
20[†]Then David said to Solomon his son, m “Be strong and courageous
and do it. Do not be afraid and do not be dismayed, for the LORD God, even
my God, is with you. He will not leave you or forsake you, until all the
work for the service of the house of the LORD is finished. 21And behold the
n divisions of the priests and the Levites for all the service of the house of
God; and with you in all the work will be o every willing man who has skill
for any kind of service; also the officers and all the people will be wholly at
your command.”
Offerings for the Temple