1 CHRONICLES 12 [†] x Now these are the men who came to David at Ziklag,
while he could not move about freely because of Saul the son of Kish. And
they were among the mighty men who helped him in war.
2They y were
bowmen and could shoot arrows and sling stones with either the right or the
z left hand; they were Benjaminites, a Saul’s kinsmen. 3The chief was
Ahiezer, then Joash, both sons of Shemaah of b Gibeah; also Jeziel and
Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; Beracah, Jehu of c Anathoth, 4Ishmaiah of
d Gibeon, a mighty man among the thirty and a leader over the thirty;
Jeremiah, [1] Jahaziel, Johanan, Jozabad of Gederah, 5Eluzai, [2] Jerimoth,
Bealiah, Shemariah, Shephatiah the Haruphite; 6Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel,
Joezer, and Jashobeam, the e Korahites; 7And Joelah and Zebadiah, the sons
of Jeroham of Gedor.
8[†]From the Gadites there went over to David at the stronghold in the
wilderness mighty and experienced warriors, expert with shield and spear,
whose faces were like the faces of lions and who were f swift as gazelles
upon the mountains: 9Ezer the chief, Obadiah second, Eliab third,
10Mishmannah fourth, Jeremiah fifth, 11Attai sixth, Eliel seventh, 12Johanan
eighth, Elzabad ninth, 13Jeremiah tenth, Machbannai eleventh. 14These
Gadites were officers of the army; the least was a g match for a hundred
men and the greatest for a thousand. 15These are the men who crossed the
Jordan in the first month, when it was h overflowing all its banks, and put to
flight all those in the valleys, to the east and to the west.
16[†]And some of the men of Benjamin and Judah came to the stronghold
to David. 17David went out to meet them and said to them, “If you have
come to me in friendship to help me, my heart will be joined to you; but if
to betray me to my adversaries, although there is no wrong in my hands,
then may the God of our fathers see and rebuke you.” 18Then i the Spirit
clothed j Amasai, chief of the thirty, and he said,
“We are yours, O David,
and with you, O son of Jesse!
k Peace, peace to you,
and peace to your helpers!
For your God helps you.”
Then David received them and made them officers of his troops.
19[†]Some of the men of Manasseh deserted to David l when he came
with the Philistines for the battle against Saul. (Yet he did not help them, for
the rulers of the Philistines took counsel and sent him away, saying, m “At
peril to our heads he will desert to his master Saul.”) 20As he went to
Ziklag, these men of Manasseh deserted to him: Adnah, Jozabad, Jediael,
Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, chiefs of thousands in Manasseh.
21They helped David against n the band of raiders, for they were all mighty
men of valor and were commanders in the army.
22[†]For from day to day
men came to David to help him, until there was a great army, like an army
of God.
23[†]These are the numbers of the divisions of the armed troops o who
came to David in Hebron p to turn the kingdom of Saul over to him,
q according to the word of the LORD.
24The men of Judah bearing shield and
spear were 6,800 armed troops. 25Of the Simeonites, mighty men of valor
for war, 7,100. 26Of the Levites 4,600. 27The prince Jehoiada, of the house
of Aaron, and with him 3,700. 28 r Zadok, a young man mighty in valor, and
twenty-two commanders from his own fathers’ house. 29Of the
Benjaminites, s the kinsmen of Saul, 3,000, of whom the t majority had to
that point kept their allegiance to the house of Saul. 30Of the Ephraimites
20,800, mighty men of valor, famous men in their fathers’ houses. 31Of the
half-tribe of Manasseh 18,000, who were u expressly named to come and
make David king. 32Of Issachar, men who v had understanding of the times,
to know what Israel ought to do, 200 chiefs, and all their kinsmen under
their command. 33Of Zebulun 50,000 seasoned troops, w equipped for battle
with all the weapons of war, to help David [3] with x singleness of purpose.
34Of Naphtali 1,000 commanders with whom were 37,000 men armed with
shield and spear.
35Of the Danites 28,600 men equipped for battle. 36Of
y Asher 40,000 z seasoned troops z ready for battle. 37Of the Reubenites and
Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh from beyond the Jordan, 120,000
men armed with all the weapons of war.
38All these, men of war, arrayed in battle order, came to Hebron with a a
whole heart to make David king over all Israel. Likewise, all the rest of
Israel were of a b single mind to make David king. 39And they were there
with David for three days, eating and drinking, for their brothers had made
preparation for them. 40And also their relatives, from as far as Issachar and
Zebulun and Naphtali, came bringing food on donkeys and on camels and
on mules and on oxen, abundant provisions of flour, c cakes of figs, clusters
of raisins, and wine and oil, oxen and sheep, for there was joy in Israel.
The Ark Brought from Kiriath-Jearim