1 CHRONICLES 3 [†] n These are the sons of David who were born to him in
Hebron: the firstborn, Amnon, by Ahinoam the Jezreelite; the second,
o Daniel, by Abigail the Carmelite, 2the third, Absalom, whose mother was
Maacah, the daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah,
whose mother was Haggith; 3the fifth, Shephatiah, by Abital; the sixth,
Ithream, by his wife Eglah; 4six were born to him in Hebron, p where he
reigned for seven years and six months. q And he reigned thirty-three years
in Jerusalem. 5
r These were born to him in Jerusalem: s Shimea, Shobab,
Nathan and t Solomon, four by u Bath-shua, the daughter of u Ammiel;
6then Ibhar, v Elishama, Eliphelet, 7Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 8Elishama,
w Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine. 9All these were David’s sons, besides the sons
of the concubines, x and Tamar was their sister.
10[†]The son of Solomon was y Rehoboam, z Abijah his son, a Asa his
son, b Jehoshaphat his son, 11
c Joram his son, d Ahaziah his son, e Joash his
son, 12 f Amaziah his son, g Azariah his son, h Jotham his son, 13 i Ahaz his
son, j Hezekiah his son, k Manasseh his son, 14 l Amon his son, m Josiah his
son. 15The sons of Josiah: n Johanan the firstborn, the second o Jehoiakim,
the third p Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum. 16The descendants of q Jehoiakim:
r Jeconiah his son, s Zedekiah his son; 17[†]and the sons of Jeconiah, the
t captive: u Shealtiel his son, 18Malchiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah,
Hoshama and Nedabiah; 19[†]and the sons of Pedaiah: v Zerubbabel and
Shimei; and the sons of v Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah, and
Shelomith was their sister; 20and Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah, and
Jushab-hesed, five. 21The sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah and Jeshaiah, his
son [1] Rephaiah, his son Arnan, his son Obadiah, his son Shecaniah. 22The
son [2] of Shecaniah: w Shemaiah. And the sons of Shemaiah: x Hattush,
Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat, six. 23The sons of Neariah: Elioenai,
Hizkiah, and Azrikam, three. 24The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib,
Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and Anani, seven.
Descendants of Judah