1 CHRONICLES 19 [†] q Now after this Nahash the king of the Ammonites
died, and his son reigned in his place. 2[†]And David said, “I will deal
kindly with Hanun the son of Nahash, for his father dealt kindly with me.”
So David sent messengers to console him concerning his father. And
David’s servants came to the land of the Ammonites to Hanun to console
him. 3But the princes of the Ammonites said to Hanun, “Do you think,
because David has sent comforters to you, that he is honoring your father?
Have not his servants come to you to search and to overthrow and to spy
out the land?” 4So Hanun took David’s servants and shaved them and cut
off their garments in the middle, at their hips, and sent them away; 5and
they departed. When David was told concerning the men, he sent
messengers to meet them, for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king
said, “Remain at Jericho until your beards have grown and then return.”
6[†]When the Ammonites saw that they had become a stench to David,
Hanun and the Ammonites sent 1,000 talents [1] of silver to hire chariots and
horsemen r from Mesopotamia, from Aram-maacah, and from s Zobah.
7They hired 32,000 chariots and the king of Maacah with his army, who
came and encamped before t Medeba. And the Ammonites were mustered
from their cities and came to battle. 8When David heard of it, he sent Joab
and all the army of the mighty men. 9And the Ammonites came out and
drew up in battle array at the entrance of the city, and the kings who had
come were by themselves in the open country.
Ammonites and Syrians Defeated
10When Joab saw that the battle was set against him both in front and in the
rear, he chose some of the best men of Israel and arrayed them against the
Syrians. 11The rest of his men he put in the charge of u Abishai his brother,
and they were arrayed against the Ammonites. 12And he said, “If the
Syrians are too strong for me, then you shall help me, but if the Ammonites
are too strong for you, then I will help you. 13Be strong, and let us use our
strength for our people and for the cities of our God, and may the LORD do
what seems good to him.” 14So Joab and the people who were with him
drew near before the Syrians for battle, and they fled before him. 15And
when the Ammonites saw that the Syrians fled, they likewise fled before
u Abishai, Joab’s brother, and entered the city. Then Joab came to
Jerusalem.
16But when the Syrians saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they
sent messengers and brought out the Syrians who were beyond the
Euphrates, [2] with v Shophach the commander of the army of w Hadadezer
at their head. 17And when it was told to David, he gathered all Israel
together and crossed the Jordan and came to them and drew up his forces
against them. And when David set the battle in array against the Syrians,
they fought with him. 18[†]And the Syrians fled before Israel, and David
killed of the Syrians the men of x 7,000 chariots and 40,000 x foot soldiers,
and put to death also v Shophach the commander of their army.
19And when
the servants of w Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they
made peace with David and became subject to him. So the Syrians were not
willing to save the Ammonites anymore.
The Capture of Rabbah