1 CHRONICLES 13 [†]David consulted with the commanders of thousands
and of hundreds, with every leader.
2And David said to all the assembly of
Israel, “If it seems good to you and from the LORD our God, let us send
abroad to our brothers d who remain in all the lands of Israel, as well as to
the priests and Levites in the cities that have pasturelands, that they may be
gathered to us. 3Then let us bring again the ark of our God to us, e for we
did not seek it [1] in the days of Saul.” 4All the assembly agreed to do so, for
the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.
Uzzah and the Ark
5[†] f So David assembled all Israel g from the h Nile [2] of Egypt to Lebo-
hamath, to bring the ark of God i from Kiriath-jearim. 6
j And David and all
Israel went up to k Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim that belongs to Judah, to
bring up from there the ark of God, which is called by the name of the LORD
who l sits enthroned above the cherubim. 7[†]And they carried the ark of
God on a new cart, from the house of m Abinadab, and Uzzah and Ahio [3]
were driving the cart. 8[†]And David and all Israel were celebrating before
God with all their might, with song and n lyres and harps and tambourines
and cymbals and trumpets.
9And when they came to the threshing floor of o Chidon, Uzzah put out
his hand to take hold of the ark, for the oxen stumbled. 10And the anger of
the LORD was kindled against Uzzah, and he struck him down p because he
put out his hand to the ark, and q he died there before God. 11And David
was angry because the LORD had broken out against Uzzah. And that place
is called Perez-uzza [4] to this day.
12And David was afraid of God that day,
and he said, “How can I bring the ark of God home to me?” 13[†]So David
did not take the ark home into the city of David, but took it aside to the
house r of Obed-edom the Gittite. 14And the ark of God remained with the
household of Obed-edom in his house three months. s And the LORD
blessed the household of Obed-edom and all that he had.
David’s Wives and Children