1 CHRONICLES 6 [†] [1] h The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
2 i The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 3 j The children
of Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Miriam. k The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu,
Eleazar, and Ithamar.
4
l m Eleazar fathered n Phinehas, Phinehas fathered
Abishua, 5Abishua fathered Bukki, Bukki fathered Uzzi, 6Uzzi fathered
Zerahiah, Zerahiah fathered o Meraioth, 7Meraioth fathered Amariah,
Amariah fathered Ahitub, 8
p Ahitub fathered q Zadok, Zadok fathered
Ahimaaz, 9Ahimaaz fathered Azariah, Azariah fathered Johanan, 10[†]and
Johanan fathered Azariah ( r it was he who served as priest s in the house
that Solomon built in Jerusalem). 11
l Azariah fathered t Amariah, Amariah
fathered Ahitub, 12Ahitub fathered Zadok, Zadok fathered u Shallum,
13Shallum fathered v Hilkiah, Hilkiah fathered Azariah, 14Azariah fathered
w Seraiah, Seraiah fathered Jehozadak; 15and x Jehozadak went into exile
when the LORD sent Judah and Jerusalem into exile y by the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar.
16[†] [2] The z sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari. 17And these
are the names of the sons of Gershom: a Libni and Shimei. 18
b The sons of
Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel. 19 c The sons of Merari: Mahli
and Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites according to their fathers.
20 d Of Gershom: Libni his son, e Jahath his son, Zimmah his son, 21Joah his
son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son. 22[†] f The sons of
Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son, 23Elkanah his
son, Ebiasaph his son, Assir his son, 24Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah
his son, and Shaul his son. 25The sons of Elkanah: Amasai and Ahimoth,
26Elkanah his son, Zophai his son, Nahath his son, 27Eliab his son, Jeroham
his son, Elkanah his son. 28[†]The sons of Samuel: Joel [3] his firstborn, the
second Abijah. [4] 29
g The sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his
son, Uzzah his son, 30Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, and Asaiah his son.
31[†]These are the men h whom David put in charge of the service of
song in the house of the LORD i after the ark rested there. 32They ministered
with song before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solomon built
the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, and they performed their service
according to their order.
33These are the men who served and their sons. Of
the sons of the Kohathites: Heman the singer the son of Joel, son of
j Samuel, 34son of Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Eliel, son of Toah, 35son
of Zuph, son of Elkanah, son of Mahath, son of Amasai, 36son of Elkanah,
son of Joel, son of Azariah, son of Zephaniah, 37son of Tahath, son of Assir,
son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, 38son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi,
son of Israel; 39and his brother k Asaph, who stood on his right hand,
namely, Asaph the son of Berechiah, son of Shimea, 40son of Michael, son
of Baaseiah, son of Malchijah, 41son of Ethni, son of Zerah, son of Adaiah,
42son of Ethan, son of Zimmah, son of Shimei, 43son of Jahath, son of
Gershom, son of Levi. 44On the left hand were their brothers, the sons of
Merari: Ethan the son of Kishi, son of Abdi, son of Malluch, 45son of
Hashabiah, son of Amaziah, son of Hilkiah, 46son of Amzi, son of Bani, son
of Shemer,
47son of Mahli, son of Mushi, son of Merari, son of Levi. 48And
their brothers the Levites were appointed for all the service of the
tabernacle of the house of God.
49[†]But Aaron and his sons made offerings l on the altar of burnt
offering and on m the altar of incense for all the work of the Most Holy
Place, and n to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the
servant of God had commanded. 50
o These are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar
his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son, 51Bukki his son, Uzzi his son,
Zerahiah his son, 52Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,
53Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.
54[†]These are their dwelling places according to their p settlements
within their borders: to the sons of Aaron of the q clans of Kohathites, for
theirs was the first lot, 55to them they gave Hebron in the land of Judah and
its surrounding pasturelands, 56 r but the fields of the city and its villages
they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh. 57 s To the sons of Aaron they gave
the cities of refuge: Hebron, Libnah with its pasturelands, Jattir, Eshtemoa
with its pasturelands, 58Hilen with its pasturelands, Debir with its
pasturelands, 59Ashan with its pasturelands, and Beth-shemesh with its
pasturelands; 60and from the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon, [5] Geba with its
pasturelands, Alemeth with its pasturelands, and Anathoth with its
pasturelands. All their cities throughout their clans were thirteen.
61
t To the rest of the Kohathites were given by lot out of the clan of the
tribe, out of the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten cities. 62To the
Gershomites according to their clans were allotted thirteen cities out of the
tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali and Manasseh in Bashan. 63
u To the
Merarites according to their clans were allotted twelve cities out of the
tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun. 64 v So the people of Israel gave the
Levites the cities with their pasturelands. 65They gave by lot out of the
tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin w these cities that are mentioned by
name.
66 x And some of the clans of the sons of Kohath had cities of their
territory out of the tribe of Ephraim. 67They were given the cities of refuge:
Shechem with its pasturelands in the hill country of Ephraim, Gezer with its
pasturelands, 68
y Jokmeam with its pasturelands, Beth-horon with its
pasturelands, 69Aijalon with its pasturelands, Gath-rimmon with its
pasturelands, 70and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Aner with its
pasturelands, and Bileam with its pasturelands, for the rest of the clans of
the Kohathites.
71 z To the Gershomites were given out of the clan of the half-tribe of
Manasseh: Golan in Bashan with its pasturelands and a Ashtaroth with its
pasturelands; 72and out of the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh with its
pasturelands, Daberath with its pasturelands, 73Ramoth with its
pasturelands, and Anem with its pasturelands; 74out of the tribe of Asher:
Mashal with its pasturelands, Abdon with its pasturelands, 75Hukok with its
pasturelands, and Rehob with its pasturelands; 76and out of the tribe of
Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee with its pasturelands, Hammon with its
pasturelands, and Kiriathaim with its pasturelands. 77 b To the rest of the
Merarites were allotted out of the tribe of Zebulun: c Rimmono with its
pasturelands, c Tabor with its pasturelands, 78and d beyond the Jordan at
Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, out of the tribe of Reuben: Bezer in
the wilderness with its pasturelands, Jahzah with its pasturelands,
79Kedemoth with its pasturelands, and Mephaath with its pasturelands;
80and out of the tribe of Gad: e Ramoth in Gilead with its pasturelands,
f Mahanaim with its pasturelands, 81 g Heshbon with its pasturelands, and
h Jazer with its pasturelands.
Descendants of Issachar