1 CHRONICLES 2 [†]These are the sons of t Israel: u Reuben, Simeon, Levi,
Judah, v Issachar, Zebulun, 2
w Dan, x Joseph, y Benjamin, z Naphtali, a Gad,
and Asher.
3[†] b The sons of Judah: c Er, Onan and Shelah; these three
Bath-shua the Canaanite bore to him. Now Er, Judah’s firstborn, was evil in
the sight of the LORD, and he put him to death. 4His daughter-in-law
d Tamar also bore him Perez and Zerah. Judah had five sons in all.
5The e sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul. 6The sons of Zerah: Zimri,
Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Dara, five in all. 7The son [1] of Carmi: Achan,
the troubler of Israel, who f broke faith in the matter of the devoted thing;
8and Ethan’s son was Azariah.
9[†]The sons of Hezron that were born to him: Jerahmeel, g Ram, and
h Chelubai. 10
g Ram fathered Amminadab, and i Amminadab fathered
j Nahshon, prince of the sons of Judah. 11Nahshon fathered k Salmon, [2]
Salmon fathered l Boaz, 12Boaz fathered Obed, l Obed fathered Jesse.
13
m Jesse fathered Eliab his firstborn, Abinadab the second, n Shimea the
third, 14Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth, 15Ozem the sixth, o David the
seventh. 16And their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. p The sons of
Zeruiah: Abishai, Joab, and Asahel, three. 17
q Abigail bore Amasa, and the
father of Amasa was q Jether the Ishmaelite.
18[†] r Caleb the son of Hezron fathered children by his wife Azubah, and
by Jerioth; and these were her sons: Jesher, Shobab, and Ardon. 19When
Azubah died, r Caleb married s Ephrath, who bore him t Hur.
20Hur fathered
Uri, and Uri fathered u Bezalel.
21Afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of v Machir the father of
Gilead, whom he married when he was sixty years old, and she bore him
Segub. 22And Segub fathered Jair, who had twenty-three cities in the land of
Gilead. 23
w But Geshur and Aram took from them Havvoth-jair, Kenath,
and its villages, sixty towns. All these were descendants of Machir, the
father of Gilead. 24After the death of Hezron, x Caleb went in to
Ephrathah, [3] the wife of Hezron his father, and she bore him y Ashhur, the
father of Tekoa.
25[†]The sons of z Jerahmeel, the firstborn of Hezron: Ram, his firstborn,
Bunah, Oren, Ozem, and Ahijah. 26Jerahmeel also had another wife, whose
name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam. 27The sons of Ram, the
firstborn of Jerahmeel: Maaz, Jamin, and Eker.
28The sons of Onam:
Shammai and Jada. The sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur.
29The name
of Abishur’s wife was Abihail, and she bore him Ahban and Molid. 30The
sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim; and Seled died childless. 31The son [4] of
Appaim: Ishi. a The son of Ishi: Sheshan. The son of Sheshan: Ahlai. 32The
sons of Jada, Shammai’s brother: Jether and Jonathan; and Jether died
childless. 33The sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza. These were the
descendants of Jerahmeel. 34Now Sheshan had no sons, only daughters, but
Sheshan had an Egyptian slave whose name was Jarha. 35So Sheshan gave
his daughter in marriage to Jarha his slave, and she bore him Attai. 36Attai
fathered Nathan, and Nathan fathered b Zabad. 37 b Zabad fathered Ephlal,
and Ephlal fathered c Obed. 38Obed fathered Jehu, and Jehu fathered
Azariah. 39Azariah fathered Helez, and Helez fathered Eleasah. 40Eleasah
fathered Sismai, and Sismai fathered Shallum. 41Shallum fathered
Jekamiah, and Jekamiah fathered d Elishama.
42[†]The sons of e Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel: Mareshah [5] his
firstborn, who fathered Ziph. The son [6] of Mareshah: f Hebron. [7] 43The
sons of Hebron: Korah, Tappuah, Rekem and Shema. 44Shema fathered
Raham, the father of Jorkeam; and Rekem fathered Shammai. 45The son of
Shammai: Maon; and Maon fathered Beth-zur.
46Ephah also, Caleb’s
concubine, bore Haran, Moza, and Gazez; and Haran fathered Gazez. 47The
sons of Jahdai: Regem, Jotham, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah, and Shaaph.
48Maacah, Caleb’s concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah. 49She also bore
Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbenah and the
father of Gibea; and the g daughter of Caleb was Achsah. 50These were the
descendants of Caleb.
The sons [8] of Hur the firstborn of h Ephrathah: Shobal the father of
Kiriath-jearim, 51 i Salma, the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph the father of
Beth-gader.
52Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim had other sons: j Haroeh,
half of the Menuhoth. 53And the clans of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites, the
Puthites, the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; from these came the
k Zorathites and the Eshtaolites. 54The sons of Salma: Bethlehem, the
Netophathites, Atroth-beth-joab and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites.
55The clans also of the scribes who lived at Jabez: the Tirathites, the
Shimeathites and the Sucathites. These are the l Kenites who came from
Hammath, the father of m the house of Rechab.
Descendants of David