1 CHRONICLES 15 [†]David [1] built houses for himself in the city of David.
And he prepared a place for the ark of God and d pitched a tent for it. 2Then
David said that no one but the Levites may carry e the ark of God, for the
LORD had chosen them to carry the ark of the LORD and to minister to him
forever.
3 f And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem to bring up the ark
of the LORD g to its place, which he had prepared for it. 4[†]And David
gathered together the sons of Aaron and h the Levites: 5of the sons of
Kohath, Uriel the chief, with 120 of his brothers; 6of the sons of Merari,
Asaiah the chief, with 220 of his brothers; 7of the sons of Gershom, Joel the
chief, with 130 of his brothers; 8of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the
chief, with 200 of his brothers; 9of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief, with
80 of his brothers; 10of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief, with 112
of his brothers. 11[†]Then David summoned the priests i Zadok and
j Abiathar, and the Levites Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and
Amminadab, 12and said to them, “You are the heads of the fathers’ houses
of the Levites. k Consecrate yourselves, you and your brothers, so that you
may bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel, l to the place that I
have prepared for it. 13 m Because you did not carry it the first time, the
LORD our God broke out against us, because we did not seek him according
to the rule.” 14So the priests and the Levites consecrated themselves to
bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel. 15And the Levites carried
the ark of God on their shoulders n with the poles, o as Moses had
commanded according to the word of the LORD.
16[†]David also commanded the chiefs of the Levites to appoint their
brothers as the singers who should play loudly on p musical instruments, on
harps and lyres and cymbals, to raise sounds of joy.
17[†]So the Levites
appointed q Heman the son of Joel; and of his brothers r Asaph the son of
Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari, their brothers, s Ethan the son of
Kushaiah; 18and with them their brothers of the second order, Zechariah,
Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah,
Eliphelehu, and Mikneiah, and the gatekeepers Obed-edom and Jeiel. 19The
singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were to sound bronze cymbals;
20Zechariah, t Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah, and
Benaiah were to play harps according to u Alamoth; 21but Mattithiah,
Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, v Obed-edom, Jeiel, and Azaziah were to lead with
lyres according to w the Sheminith. 22Chenaniah, leader of the Levites in
music, should direct the music, for he understood it. 23Berechiah and
Elkanah were to be gatekeepers for the ark. 24Shebaniah, Joshaphat,
Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, should
x blow the trumpets before the ark of God. v Obed-edom and Jehiah were to
be gatekeepers for the ark.
25[†] y So David and the elders of Israel and the commanders of thousands
went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from the house of
v Obed-edom with rejoicing. 26And because God helped the Levites who
were carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD, they sacrificed z seven
bulls and seven rams. 27David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, as also
were all the Levites who were carrying the ark, and the singers and
Chenaniah the leader of the music of the singers. And David wore a linen
ephod. 28So all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with
shouting, to the sound of the horn, a trumpets, and cymbals, and made loud
music on b harps and lyres.
29And as the ark of the covenant of the LORD came to the city of David,
Michal the daughter of Saul looked out of the window and saw King David
dancing and celebrating, and she despised him in her heart.
The Ark Placed in a Tent