1 CHRONICLES 18 [†] a After this David defeated the Philistines and subdued
them, and he took Gath and its villages out of the hand of the Philistines.
2And he defeated Moab, and the Moabites became servants to David and
brought tribute.
3David also defeated b Hadadezer king of c Zobah-Hamath, as he went to
set up his monument [1] at the river Euphrates. 4And David took from him
1,000 chariots, d 7,000 horsemen, and 20,000 foot soldiers. And David
hamstrung all the chariot horses, but left enough for 100 chariots. 5And
when the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king e of Zobah,
David struck down 22,000 men of the Syrians. 6[†]Then David put
garrisons [2] in Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became servants to
David and brought tribute. And the LORD gave victory to David [3] wherever
he went. 7And David took the shields of gold that were carried by the
servants of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem. 8And from f Tibhath
and from Cun, cities of Hadadezer, David took a large amount of bronze.
g With it Solomon made the bronze sea and the pillars and the vessels of
bronze.
9When h Tou king of Hamath heard that David had defeated the whole
army of Hadadezer, king e of Zobah, 10he sent his son i Hadoram to King
David, to ask about his health and to bless him because he had fought
against b Hadadezer and defeated him; for b Hadadezer had often been at
war with Tou. And he sent all sorts of articles of gold, of silver, and of
bronze. 11These also King David dedicated to the LORD, together with the
silver and gold that he had carried off from all the nations, from j Edom,
Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek.
12[†]And k Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, killed 18,000 Edomites in the
Valley of Salt. 13Then he put garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites
became David’s servants. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he
went.
David’s Administration
14[†]So David reigned over all Israel, and he administered justice and equity
to all his people. 15[†]And l Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the army; and
Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder; 16 m and Zadok the son of
Ahitub and n Ahimelech the son of Abiathar were priests; and o Shavsha
was secretary; 17and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites
and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were the p chief officials in the service
of the king.
The Ammonites Disgrace David’s Men