1 CHRONICLES 23 [†] q When David was old and full of days, r he made
Solomon his son king over Israel.
2David [1] assembled all the leaders of Israel and the priests and the
Levites. 3[†]The Levites, s thirty years old and upward, were numbered, and
t the total was u 38,000 men. 4“Twenty-four thousand of these,” David
said, [2] v “shall have charge of the work in the house of the LORD, 6,000
shall be w officers and judges, 54,000 gatekeepers, and 4,000 shall offer
praises to the LORD with the instruments x that I have made for praise.”
6[†] y And David organized them in divisions z corresponding to the sons of
Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
7 a The sons of Gershon [3] were Ladan and Shimei. 8The sons of Ladan:
b Jehiel the chief, and Zetham, and Joel, three. 9The sons of Shimei:
Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the heads of the fathers’
houses of Ladan. 10And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, and Jeush and
Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei. 11Jahath was the chief, and
Zizah the second; but Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons, therefore
they became counted as a single father’s house.
12
c The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.
13
d The
sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. e Aaron was set apart to dedicate the
most holy things, that he and his sons forever should f make offerings
before the LORD and g minister to him and h pronounce blessings in his
name forever.
14But the sons of Moses the i man of God were named among
the j tribe of Levi. 15The k sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.
16The sons
of Gershom: l Shebuel the chief. 17The sons of Eliezer: Rehabiah the chief.
Eliezer had no other sons, but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.
18The
sons of Izhar: Shelomith the chief. 19The m sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief,
Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. 20
n The
sons of Uzziel: Micah the chief and Isshiah the second.
21 o The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and
p Kish. 22Eleazar died q having no sons, but only daughters; their r kinsmen,
the sons of Kish, married them. 23
s The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and
Jeremoth, three.
24[†] t These were the sons of Levi by their fathers’ houses, the heads of
fathers’ houses u as they were listed according to the number of the names
of the individuals from v twenty years old and upward who were to do the
work for the service of the house of the LORD.
25For David said, “The
LORD, the God of Israel, w has given rest to his people, and he dwells in
Jerusalem forever.
26And so the Levites no longer need x to carry the
tabernacle or any of the things for its service.” 27For by the last words of
David the sons of Levi were numbered from v twenty years old and upward.
28For their duty was to assist the sons of Aaron for the service of the house
of the LORD, having the care of the courts and the chambers, the cleansing
of all that is holy, and any work for the service of the house of God. 29Their
duty was also to assist with the y showbread, the z flour for the grain
offering, the wafers of unleavened bread, the a baked offering, the b offering
mixed with oil, and all c measures of quantity or size. 30And they were to
stand every morning, thanking and praising the LORD, and likewise at
evening, 31and whenever burnt offerings were offered to the LORD d on
Sabbaths, e new moons, and feast days, f according to the number required
of them, regularly before the LORD.
32Thus g they were to keep charge of
the tent of meeting and the sanctuary, and to attend the sons of Aaron, their
brothers, for the h service of the house of the LORD.
David Organizes the Priests