1 CORINTHIANS 2 [†]And I, when I came to you, brothers, [1] x did not come
proclaiming to you y the testimony [2] of God with lofty speech or wisdom.
2For I decided to know nothing among you except z Jesus Christ and him
crucified. 3And a I was with you b in weakness and in fear and much
trembling, 4and my speech and my message were not in plausible words of
wisdom, but in demonstration of c the Spirit and of power,
5so that your
faith might not rest in the wisdom of men [3] but d in the power of God.
Wisdom from the Spirit
6[†]Yet among e the mature we do impart wisdom, although it is not f a
wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, g who are doomed to pass
away.
7[†]But we impart a secret and hidden wisdom of God, h which God
decreed before the ages for our glory.
8None of i the rulers of this age
understood this, for j if they had, they would not have crucified k the Lord
of glory.
9But, as it is written,
l “What no eye has seen, nor ear heard,
nor the heart of man imagined,
what God has m prepared n for those who love him”—
10these things o God has revealed to us through the Spirit. For the Spirit
searches everything, even p the depths of God. 11For who knows a person’s
thoughts q except the spirit of that person, which is in him? So also no one
comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God. 12Now r we
have received not s the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God,
that we might understand the things freely given us by God. 13[†]And we
impart this t in words not taught by human wisdom but taught by the Spirit,
u interpreting spiritual truths to those who are spiritual. [4]
14The natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are v folly to him, and w he is not able to understand them because they
are spiritually discerned. 15The x spiritual person judges all things, but is
himself to be judged by no one. 16
y “For who has understood the mind of
the Lord so as to instruct him?” But z we have the mind of Christ.
Divisions in the Church