1 KINGS 16 [†]And the word of the LORD came to n Jehu the son of
o Hanani against Baasha, saying, 2“Since I p exalted you out of the dust and
made you leader over my people Israel, and q you have walked in the way
of Jeroboam and have made my people Israel to sin, provoking me to anger
with their sins, 3behold, I will utterly r sweep away s Baasha and his house,
and I will make your house t like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
4 u Anyone belonging to Baasha who dies in the city the dogs shall eat, and
anyone of his who dies in the field the birds of the heavens shall eat.”
5Now the rest of the acts of Baasha and what he did, and his might, are
they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 6And
Baasha slept with his fathers and was buried at v Tirzah, and Elah his son
reigned in his place. 7Moreover, the word of the LORD came by the prophet
n Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha and his house, both because of all
the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, provoking him to anger with
the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam, and also
because w he destroyed it.
Elah Reigns in Israel
8In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of Judah, Elah the son of Baasha
began to reign over Israel in Tirzah, and he reigned two years. 9But his
servant x Zimri, commander of half his chariots, conspired against him.
When he was at Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, y who
was over the household in Tirzah, 10Zimri came in and struck him down and
killed him, in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in
his place.
11[†]When he began to reign, as soon as he had seated himself on his
throne, he struck down z all the house of Baasha. He a did not leave him a
single male of his relatives or his friends. 12Thus Zimri destroyed all the
house of Baasha, b according to the word of the LORD, which he spoke
against Baasha by n Jehu the prophet, 13for all the sins of Baasha and the
sins of Elah his son, which they sinned and which they made Israel to sin,
c provoking the LORD God of Israel to anger with their idols. 14[†]Now the
rest of the acts of Elah and all that he did, are they not written in the Book
of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
Zimri Reigns in Israel
15In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, Zimri reigned seven
days in Tirzah. Now the troops were encamped against d Gibbethon, which
belonged to the Philistines, 16and the troops who were encamped heard it
said, “Zimri has conspired, and he has killed the king.” Therefore all Israel
made Omri, the commander of the army, king over Israel that day in the
camp. 17So Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they
besieged Tirzah. 18And when Zimri saw that the city was taken, he went
into the citadel of the king’s house and burned the king’s house over him
with fire and died, 19because of his sins that he committed, doing evil in the
sight of the LORD, e walking in the way of Jeroboam, and for his sin which
he committed, making Israel to sin. 20Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and
the conspiracy that he made, are they not written in the Book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
Omri Reigns in Israel
21[†]Then the people of Israel were divided into two parts. Half of the
people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king, and half
followed Omri. 22But the people who followed Omri overcame the people
who followed Tibni the son of Ginath. So Tibni died, and Omri became
king. 23In the thirty-first year of Asa king of Judah, Omri began to reign
over Israel, and he reigned for twelve years; six years he reigned in Tirzah.
24[†]He bought the hill of f Samaria from Shemer for two talents [1] of
silver, and he fortified the hill and called the name of the city that he built
g Samaria, after the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill.
25 h Omri did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and did more evil
i than all who were before him. 26For e he walked in all the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in the sins that he made Israel to sin,
j provoking the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger by their idols. 27Now the
rest of the acts of Omri that he did, and the might that he showed, are they
not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 28And
Omri slept with his fathers and was buried in Samaria, and Ahab his son
reigned in his place.
Ahab Reigns in Israel
29In the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah, Ahab the son of Omri
began to reign over Israel, and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in
Samaria twenty-two years. 30And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight
of the LORD, k more than all who were before him. 31[†]And as if it had
been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
l he took for his wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the
m Sidonians, n and went and served Baal and worshiped him. 32He erected
an altar for Baal in o the house of Baal, which he built in Samaria. 33And
Ahab made an p Asherah. Ahab did more to provoke the LORD, the God of
Israel, to anger k than all the kings of Israel who were before him. 34[†] q In
his days Hiel of Bethel built r Jericho. He laid its foundation at the cost of
Abiram his firstborn, and set up its gates at the cost of his youngest son
Segub, according to the word of the LORD, which he spoke by Joshua the
son of Nun.
Elijah Predicts a Drought