1 KINGS 6 [†] y In the four hundred and eightieth year after the people of
Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign
over Israel, in the month of Ziv, which is the second month, z he began to
build the house of the LORD.
2
a The house that King Solomon built for the
LORD was sixty cubits [1] long, twenty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high.
3The vestibule in front of the nave of the house was twenty cubits long,
equal to the width of the house, and ten cubits deep in front of the house.
4And b he made for the house windows with recessed frames. [2] 5
c He also
built a structure [3] against the wall of the house, running around the walls
of the house, both the nave and d the inner sanctuary. And he made e side
chambers all around. 6The lowest story [4] was five cubits broad, the middle
one was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad. For around
the outside of the house he made offsets on the wall in order that the
supporting beams should not be inserted into the walls of the house.
7When the house was built, f it was with stone prepared at the quarry, so
that neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron was heard in the house
while it was being built.
8The entrance for the lowest [5] story was on the south side of the house,
and one went up by stairs to the middle story, and from the middle story to
the third. 9
g So he built the house and finished it, and he made the ceiling of
the house of beams and planks of cedar.
10He built the structure against the
whole house, five cubits high, and it was joined to the house with timbers of
cedar.
11Now the word of the LORD came to Solomon, 12[†]“Concerning this
house that you are building, h if you will walk in my statutes and obey my
rules and keep all my commandments and walk in them, then I will
establish my word with you, i which I spoke to David your father.
13And j I
will dwell among the children of Israel k and will not forsake my people
Israel.”
14[†] l So Solomon built the house and finished it. 15He lined the walls of
the house on the inside with boards of cedar. From the floor of the house to
the walls of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood, m and he
covered the floor of the house with boards of cypress. 16
n He built twenty
cubits of the rear of the house with boards of cedar from the floor to the
walls, and he built this within as an inner sanctuary, as o the Most Holy
Place. 17The house, that is, the nave in front of the inner sanctuary, was
forty cubits long. 18The cedar within the house was carved in the form of
p gourds and open flowers. All was cedar; no stone was seen. 19The inner
sanctuary he prepared in the innermost part of the house, to set there the ark
of the covenant of the LORD.
20The inner sanctuary [6] was twenty cubits
long, twenty cubits wide, and twenty cubits high, and he overlaid it with
pure gold. He also overlaid [7] an altar of cedar.
21And Solomon overlaid the
inside of the house with pure gold, and he drew chains of gold across, in
front of the inner sanctuary, and overlaid it with gold. 22And he overlaid the
whole house with gold, until all the house was finished. q Also the whole
altar that belonged to the inner sanctuary he overlaid with gold.
23 r In the inner sanctuary s he made two cherubim of olivewood, each ten
cubits high. 24Five cubits was the length of one wing of the cherub, and five
cubits the length of the other wing of the cherub; it was ten cubits from the
tip of one wing to the tip of the other.
25The other cherub also measured ten
cubits; both cherubim had the same measure and the same form. 26The
height of one cherub was ten cubits, and so was that of the other cherub.
27He put the cherubim in the innermost part of the house. t And the wings
of the cherubim were spread out so that a wing of one touched the one wall,
and a wing of the other cherub touched the other wall; their other wings
touched each other in the middle of the house. 28And he overlaid the
cherubim with gold.
29Around all the walls of the house he carved engraved figures of
cherubim and palm trees and open flowers, in the inner and outer rooms.
30The floor of the house he overlaid with gold in the inner and outer rooms.
31For the entrance to the inner sanctuary he made doors of olivewood; the
lintel and the doorposts were five-sided. [8] 32He covered the two doors of
olivewood with carvings of cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers. He
overlaid them with gold and spread gold on the cherubim and on the palm
trees.
33So also he made for the entrance to the nave doorposts of olivewood, in
the form of a square, 34and two doors of cypress wood. u The two leaves of
the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were
folding. 35On them he carved cherubim and palm trees and open flowers,
and he overlaid them with gold evenly applied on the carved work.
36[†] v He built the inner court with three courses of cut stone and one
course of cedar beams.
37
w In the fourth year the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid,
in the month of Ziv.
38[†]And in the eleventh year, in the month of Bul,
which is the eighth month, the house was finished in all its parts, and
according to all its specifications. He was seven years in building it.
Solomon Builds His Palace
1 KINGS 7 Solomon was x building his own house thirteen years, and he
finished his entire house.
2[†]He built y the House of the Forest of Lebanon. Its length was a
hundred cubits [1] and its breadth fifty cubits and its height thirty cubits, and
it was built on four [2] rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams on the pillars.
3And it was covered with cedar above the chambers that were on the forty-
five pillars, fifteen in each row.
4There were window frames in three rows,
and window opposite window in three tiers. 5All the doorways and
windows [3] had square frames, and window was opposite window in three
tiers.
6[†]And he made z the Hall of Pillars; its length was fifty cubits, and its
breadth thirty cubits. There was a porch in front with pillars, and a a canopy
in front of them.
7And he made the Hall of the Throne where he was to pronounce
judgment, even the Hall of Judgment. b It was finished with cedar from
floor to rafters. [4]
8His own house where he was to dwell, in the other court back of the
hall, was of like workmanship. Solomon also made a house like this hall for
Pharaoh’s daughter c whom he had taken in marriage.
9All these were made of costly stones, cut according to measure, sawed
with saws, back and front, even from the foundation to the coping, and from
the outside to the great court. 10The foundation was of costly stones, huge
stones, stones of eight and ten cubits. 11And above were costly stones, cut
according to measurement, and cedar.
12 d The great court had three courses
of cut stone all around, and a course of cedar beams; so had the inner court
of the house of the LORD and e the vestibule of the house.
The Temple Furnishings
13[†]And King Solomon sent and brought f Hiram from Tyre. 14He was the
son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a
worker in bronze. And g he was full of wisdom, understanding, and skill for
making any work in bronze. He came to King Solomon and did all his
work.
15[†] h He cast i two pillars of bronze. j Eighteen cubits was the height of
one pillar, and a line of twelve cubits measured its circumference. It was
hollow, and its thickness was four fingers. The second pillar was the
same. [5] 16He also made two capitals of cast bronze to set on the tops of the
pillars. The height of the one capital was five cubits, and j the height of the
other capital was five cubits. 17There were lattices of checker work with
wreaths of chain work for the capitals on the tops of the pillars, a lattice [6]
for the one capital and a lattice for the other capital. 18Likewise he made
pomegranates [7] in two rows around the one latticework to cover the capital
that was on the top of the pillar, and he did the same with the other capital.
19Now the capitals that were on the tops of the pillars in the vestibule were
of lily-work, four cubits. 20The capitals were on the two pillars and also
above the rounded projection which was beside the latticework. There were
k two hundred pomegranates in two rows all around, and so with the other
capital. 21 l He set up the pillars at the vestibule of the temple. He set up the
pillar on the south and called its name Jachin, and he set up the pillar on the
north and called its name Boaz. 22And on the tops of the pillars was lily-
work. Thus the work of the pillars was finished.
23[†] m Then he made n the sea of cast metal. It was round, ten cubits from
brim to brim, and five cubits high, and a line of thirty cubits measured its
circumference. 24Under its brim were o gourds, for ten cubits, compassing
the sea all around. The gourds were in two rows, cast with it when it was
cast. 25It stood on p twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing west, three
facing south, and three facing east. The sea was set on them, and all their
rear parts were inward. 26Its thickness was a handbreadth, [8] and its brim
was made like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily. It held two
thousand baths. [9]
27He also made the q ten stands of bronze. Each stand was four cubits
long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high. 28This was the construction of
the stands: they had panels, and the panels were set in the frames, 29and on
the panels that were set in the frames were lions, oxen, and cherubim. On
the frames, both above and below the lions and oxen, there were wreaths of
beveled work. 30Moreover, each stand had four bronze wheels and axles of
bronze, and at the four corners were supports for a basin. The supports were
cast with wreaths at the side of each. 31Its opening was within a crown that
projected upward one cubit. Its opening was round, as a pedestal is made, a
cubit and a half deep. At its opening there were carvings, and its panels
were square, not round. 32And the four wheels were underneath the panels.
The axles of the wheels were of one piece with the stands, and the height of
a wheel was a cubit and a half. 33The wheels were made like a chariot
wheel; their axles, their rims, their spokes, and their hubs were all cast.
34There were four supports at the four corners of each stand. The supports
were of one piece with the stands. 35And on the top of the stand there was a
round band half a cubit high; and on the top of the stand its stays and its
panels were of one piece with it. 36And on the surfaces of its stays and on
its panels, he carved cherubim, lions, and palm trees, according to the space
of each, with wreaths all around. 37After this manner he made q the ten
stands. All of them were cast alike, of the same measure and the same form.
38And he made r ten basins of bronze. Each basin held forty baths, each
basin measured four cubits, and there was a basin for each of the ten stands.
39And he set the stands, five on the south side of the house, and five on the
north side of the house. And he set the sea at the southeast corner of the
house.
40 s Hiram also made t the pots, the shovels, and the basins. So Hiram
finished all the work that he did for King Solomon on the house of the
LORD: 41the two pillars, the two bowls of the capitals that were on the tops
of the pillars, and the two u latticeworks to cover the two bowls of the
capitals that were on the tops of the pillars; 42and the v four hundred
pomegranates for the two latticeworks, two rows of pomegranates for each
latticework, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the pillars;
43the ten stands, and the ten basins on the stands; 44and w the one sea, and
the twelve oxen underneath the sea.
45Now x the pots, the shovels, and the basins, all these vessels in the
house of the LORD, which Hiram made for King Solomon, were of
burnished bronze. 46In the plain of the Jordan the king cast them, in the clay
ground between y Succoth and z Zarethan. 47And Solomon left all the
vessels unweighed, because there were so many of them; a the weight of the
bronze was not ascertained.
48[†]So Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of the LORD:
b the golden altar, c the golden table for d the bread of the Presence, 49 e the
lampstands of pure gold, five on the south side and five on the north, before
the inner sanctuary; f the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs, of gold; 50the
cups, snuffers, basins, dishes for incense, and g fire pans, of pure gold; and
the sockets of gold, for the doors of the innermost part of the house, h the
Most Holy Place, and for the doors of the nave of the temple.
51Thus all the work that King Solomon did on the house of the LORD was
finished. And Solomon brought in i the things that David his father had
dedicated, the silver, the gold, and the vessels, and stored them in the
treasuries of the house of the LORD.
The Ark Brought into the Temple