1 KINGS 8 [†] j Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the
heads of the tribes, k the leaders of the fathers’ houses of the people of
Israel, before King Solomon in Jerusalem, l to bring up the ark of the
covenant of the LORD out of m the city of David, which is Zion. 2[†]And all
the men of Israel assembled to King Solomon at n the feast in the month
Ethanim, which is the seventh month. 3[†]And all the elders of Israel came,
and o the priests took up the ark. 4And they brought up the ark of the LORD,
p the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent; the
priests and the Levites brought them up. 5And King Solomon and all the
congregation of Israel, who had assembled before him, were with him
before the ark, q sacrificing so many sheep and oxen that they could not be
counted or numbered. 6
r Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of
the LORD s to its place in t the inner sanctuary of the house, in the Most
Holy Place, underneath the wings of the cherubim. 7For the cherubim
spread out their wings over the place of the ark, so that the cherubim
overshadowed the ark and its poles. 8
u And the poles were so long that the
ends of the poles were seen from the Holy Place before t the inner
sanctuary; but they could not be seen from outside. And they are there to
this day.
9[†]There was nothing in the ark except v the two tablets of stone
that Moses put there at Horeb, where w the LORD made a covenant with the
people of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt. 10[†]And when
the priests came out of the Holy Place, x a cloud filled the house of the
LORD,
11so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud,
for the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD.
Solomon Blesses the LORD
12[†] y Then Solomon said, “The LORD [1] has said that he would dwell z in
thick darkness. 13
a I have indeed built you an exalted house, b a place for
you to dwell in forever.” 14Then the king turned around and c blessed all the
assembly of Israel, while all the assembly of Israel stood. 15And he said,
d “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who with his hand has fulfilled
e what he promised with his mouth to David my father, saying, 16 f ‘Since
the day that I brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of
all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house, g that my name might be
there. h But I chose David to be over my people Israel.’ 17[†] i Now it was in
the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of the LORD, the
God of Israel. 18But the LORD said to David my father, ‘Whereas it was in
your heart to build a house for my name, you did well that it was in your
heart. 19
j Nevertheless, you shall not build the house, but your son who
shall be born to you shall build the house for my name.’ 20Now the LORD
has fulfilled his promise that he made. For I have risen in the place of David
my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, k as the LORD promised, and I
have built the house for the name of the LORD, the God of Israel. 21And
there I have provided a place for the ark, l in which is the covenant of the
LORD that he made with our fathers, when he brought them out of the land
of Egypt.”
Solomon’s Prayer of Dedication
22[†]Then Solomon m stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of
all the assembly of Israel and n spread out his hands toward heaven, 23and
said, “O LORD, God of Israel, o there is no God like you, in heaven above or
on earth beneath, p keeping covenant and showing steadfast love to your
servants who walk before you with all their heart; 24you have kept with
your servant David my father what you declared to him. e You spoke with
your mouth, and with your hand have fulfilled it this day.
25Now therefore,
O LORD, God of Israel, keep for your servant David my father what you
have promised him, saying, q ‘You shall not lack a man to sit before me on
the throne of Israel, if only your sons pay close attention to their way, to
walk before me as you have walked before me.’ 26 r Now therefore, O God
of Israel, let your word be confirmed, which you have spoken to your
servant David my father.
27[†]“But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, s heaven and the
highest heaven cannot contain you; how much less this house that I have
built! 28Yet have regard to the prayer of your servant and to his plea, O
LORD my God, listening to the cry and to the prayer that your servant prays
before you this day,
29 t that your eyes may be open night and day toward
this house, the place of which you have said, u ‘My name shall be there,’
that you may listen to the prayer that your servant offers toward this place.
30And listen to the plea of your servant and of your people Israel, when they
pray toward this place. And listen in heaven your dwelling place, and when
you hear, forgive.
31[†]“If a man sins against his neighbor and is made to take v an oath and
comes and swears his oath before your altar in this house, 32then hear in
heaven and act and judge your servants, w condemning the guilty by
bringing his conduct on his own head, and vindicating the righteous by
rewarding him according to his righteousness.
33[†] x “When your people Israel are defeated before the enemy because
they have sinned against you, and y if they turn again to you and
acknowledge your name and pray and plead with you in this house, 34then
hear in heaven and forgive the sin of your people Israel and bring them
again to the land that you gave to their fathers.
35 z “When heaven is shut up and there is no rain because they have
sinned against you, if they pray toward this place and acknowledge your
name and turn from their sin, when you afflict them, 36then hear in heaven
and forgive the sin of your servants, your people Israel, when a you teach
them b the good way in which they should walk, and grant rain upon your
land, which you have given to your people as an inheritance.
37
c “If there is famine in the land, if there is pestilence or blight or
mildew or locust or caterpillar, if their enemy besieges them in the land at
their gates, [2] whatever plague, whatever sickness there is, 38whatever
prayer, whatever plea is made by any man or by all your people Israel, each
knowing the affliction of his own heart and stretching out his hands toward
this house, 39then hear in heaven your dwelling place and forgive and act
and render to each whose heart you know, according to all his ways ( d for
you, you only, know the hearts of all the children of mankind), 40that they
may fear you e all the days that they live in the land that you gave to our
fathers.
41“Likewise, when a foreigner, who is not of your people Israel, comes
from a far country for your name’s sake 42(for they shall hear of your great
name f and your mighty hand, and of your outstretched arm), when he
comes and prays toward this house, 43hear in heaven your dwelling place
and do according to all for which the foreigner calls to you, in order g that
all the peoples of the earth may know your name and h fear you, as do your
people Israel, and that they may know that this house that I have built is
called by your name.
44“If your people go out to battle against their enemy, by whatever way
you shall send them, and they pray to the LORD i toward the city that you
have chosen and the house that I have built for your name, 45then hear in
heaven their prayer and their plea, and maintain their cause.
46[†]“If they sin against you— j for there is no one who does not sin—and
you are angry with them and give them to an enemy, so that they are carried
away captive k to the land of the enemy, far off or near,
47yet l if they turn
their heart in the land to which they have been carried captive, and repent
and plead with you in the land of their captors, saying, m ‘We have sinned
and have acted perversely and wickedly,’ 48 n if they repent with all their
mind and with all their heart in the land of their enemies, who carried them
captive, and pray to you o toward their land, which you gave to their
fathers, the city that you have chosen, and the house that I have built for
your name, 49then hear in heaven your dwelling place their prayer and their
plea, and maintain their cause 50and forgive your people who have sinned
against you, and all their transgressions that they have committed against
you, and p grant them compassion in the sight of those who carried them
captive, that they may have compassion on them 51( q for they are your
people, and your heritage, which you brought out of Egypt, r from the midst
of the iron furnace). 52
s Let your eyes be open to the plea of your servant
and to the plea of your people Israel, giving ear to them whenever they call
to you. 53For you separated them from among all the peoples of the earth to
be your heritage, t as you declared through Moses your servant, when you
brought our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord GOD.”
Solomon’s Benediction
54[†] u Now as Solomon finished offering all this prayer and plea to the
LORD, he arose from before the altar of the LORD, where he had v knelt with
hands outstretched toward heaven. 55And he stood and w blessed all the
assembly of Israel with a loud voice, saying, 56“Blessed be the LORD who
has given rest to his people Israel, according to all that he promised. x Not
one word has failed of all his good promise, which he spoke by Moses his
servant. 57The LORD our God be with us, as he was with our fathers. y May
he not leave us or forsake us, 58that he may z incline our hearts to him, to
walk in all his ways and to keep his commandments, his statutes, and his
rules, which he commanded our fathers. 59Let these words of mine, with
which I have pleaded before the LORD, be near to the LORD our God day
and night, and may he maintain the cause of his servant and the cause of his
people Israel, as each day requires, 60that a all the peoples of the earth may
know that b the LORD is God; there is no other.
61 c Let your heart therefore
be wholly true to the LORD our God, walking in his statutes and keeping his
commandments, as at this day.”
Solomon’s Sacrifices
62 d Then e the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the
LORD.
63Solomon offered as peace offerings to the LORD 22,000 oxen and
120,000 sheep. So the king and all the people of Israel dedicated the house
of the LORD.
64The same day the king consecrated the middle of the court
that was before the house of the LORD, for there he offered the burnt
offering and the grain offering and the fat pieces of the peace offerings,
because f the bronze altar that was before the LORD was too small to receive
the burnt offering and the grain offering and the fat pieces of the peace
offerings.
65[†]So Solomon held g the feast at that time, and all Israel with him, a
great assembly, from h Lebo-hamath to i the Brook of Egypt, before the
LORD our God, seven days. [3] 66On the eighth day he sent the people away,
and they blessed the king and went to their homes joyful and glad of heart
for all the goodness that the LORD had shown to David his servant and to
Israel his people.
The LORD Appears to Solomon
1 KINGS 9 j As soon as Solomon had finished building the house of the
LORD k and the king’s house and l all that Solomon desired to build,
2[†] m the LORD appeared to Solomon a second time, as he had appeared to
him at Gibeon. 3And the LORD said to him, “I have heard your prayer and
your plea, which you have made before me. I have consecrated this house
that you have built, n by putting my name there forever. o My eyes and my
heart will be there for all time. 4[†]And as for you, if you will p walk before
me, q as David your father walked, with integrity of heart and uprightness,
doing according to all that I have commanded you, and keeping my statutes
and my rules, 5 r then I will establish your royal throne over Israel forever,
as I promised David your father, saying, ‘You shall not lack a man on the
throne of Israel.’ 6[†] s But if you turn aside from following me, you or your
children, and do not keep my commandments and my statutes that I have
set before you, but go and serve other gods and worship them, 7[†] t then I
will cut off Israel from the land that I have given them, u and the house that
I have consecrated for my name I will cast out of my sight, v and Israel will
become a proverb and a byword among all peoples. 8And this house will
become a heap of ruins. [1] Everyone passing by it will be astonished and
will hiss, and they will say, w ‘Why has the LORD done thus to this land and
to this house?’ 9Then they will say, ‘Because x they abandoned the LORD
their God who brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt and laid hold
on other gods and worshiped them and served them. Therefore the LORD has
brought all this disaster on them.’”
Solomon’s Other Acts
10[†] y At the end of z twenty years, in which Solomon had built the two
houses, the house of the LORD and the king’s house, 11[†]and Hiram king of
Tyre had supplied Solomon with cedar and cypress timber and gold, as
much as he desired, King Solomon gave to Hiram twenty cities in the land
of Galilee. 12But when Hiram came from Tyre to see the cities that Solomon
had given him, they did not please him. 13[†]Therefore he said, “What kind
of cities are these that you have given me, my brother?” So they are called
the land of a Cabul to this day.
14[†]Hiram had sent to the king 120
talents [2] of gold.
15[†]And this is the account of b the forced labor that King Solomon
drafted to build the house of the LORD and his own house and c the Millo
and the wall of Jerusalem and d Hazor and e Megiddo and Gezer 16(Pharaoh
king of Egypt had gone up and captured Gezer and burned it with fire, and
had killed f the Canaanites who lived in the city, and had given it as dowry
to g his daughter, Solomon’s wife; 17so Solomon rebuilt Gezer) and h Lower
Beth-horon 18and Baalath and Tamar in the wilderness, in the land of
Judah, [3] 19and all the store cities that Solomon had, and i the cities for his
chariots, and the cities for j his horsemen, and whatever Solomon k desired
to build in Jerusalem, in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion. 20All
the people who were left of the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of the people of Israel— 21
l their
descendants who were left after them in the land, m whom the people of
Israel were unable to devote to destruction [4]— n these Solomon drafted to
be o slaves, and so they are to this day.
22But p of the people of Israel
Solomon made no slaves. They were the soldiers, they were his officials,
his commanders, his captains, his chariot commanders and his horsemen.
23These were the chief officers who were over Solomon’s work: q 550
r who had charge of the people who carried on the work.
24But g Pharaoh’s daughter went up from the city of David to s her own
house that Solomon had built for her. t Then he built u the Millo.
25Three times a year Solomon used to offer up burnt offerings and peace
offerings on the altar that he built to the LORD, making offerings with it [5]
before the LORD. So he finished the house.
26King Solomon built a fleet of ships at v Ezion-geber, which is near
Eloth on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom. 27And Hiram sent
w with the fleet his servants, seamen who were familiar with the sea,
together with the servants of Solomon. 28And they went to x Ophir and
brought from there gold, 420 talents, and they brought it to King Solomon.
The Queen of Sheba