1 KINGS 1 [†]Now King David was old and advanced in years. And although
they covered him with clothes, he could not get warm. 2[†]Therefore his
servants said to him, “Let a young woman be sought for my lord the king,
and let her wait on the king and be in his service. Let her lie in your
arms, [1] that my lord the king may be warm.” 3So they sought for a
beautiful young woman throughout all the territory of Israel, and found
Abishag the a Shunammite, and brought her to the king. 4The young woman
was very beautiful, and she was of service to the king and attended to him,
but the king knew her not.
Adonijah Sets Himself Up as King
5[†]Now b Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, “I will be
king.” c And he prepared for himself chariots and horsemen, and fifty men
to run before him. 6His father had never at any time displeased him by
asking, “Why have you done thus and so?” He was also a very handsome
man, d and he was born next after Absalom. 7[†]He conferred with e Joab
the son of Zeruiah and with f Abiathar the priest. And they followed
Adonijah and helped him. 8But f Zadok the priest and g Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada and h Nathan the prophet and i Shimei and Rei and j David’s
mighty men were not with Adonijah.
9Adonijah sacrificed sheep, oxen, and fattened cattle by the Serpent’s
Stone, which is beside k En-rogel, and he invited all his brothers, the king’s
sons, and all the royal officials of Judah, 10but he did not invite Nathan the
prophet or Benaiah or the mighty men or l Solomon his brother.
Nathan and Bathsheba Before David
11Then Nathan said to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, “Have you not
heard that b Adonijah the son of Haggith has become king and David our
lord does not know it? 12Now therefore come, let me give you advice, that
you may save your own life and the life of your son Solomon. 13[†]Go in at
once to King David, and say to him, ‘Did you not, my lord the king, swear
to your servant, saying, m “Solomon your son shall reign after me, and he
shall sit on my throne”? Why then is Adonijah king?’ 14Then while you are
still speaking with the king, I also will come in after you and confirm [2]
your words.”
15So Bathsheba went to the king in his chamber (now the king was very
old, and Abishag the Shunammite was attending to the king). 16Bathsheba
bowed and paid homage to the king, and the king said, “What do you
desire?” 17She said to him, “My lord, you swore to your servant by the
LORD your God, saying, m ‘Solomon your son shall reign after me, and he
shall sit on my throne.’ 18And now, behold, Adonijah is king, although you,
my lord the king, do not know it. 19 n He has sacrificed oxen, fattened cattle,
and sheep in abundance, and has invited all the sons of the king, f Abiathar
the priest, and Joab the commander of the army, but l Solomon your servant
he has not invited. 20[†]And now, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are
on you, to tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after
him. 21Otherwise it will come to pass, when my lord the king o sleeps with
his fathers, that I and my son Solomon will be counted offenders.”
22While she was still speaking with the king, Nathan the prophet came in.
23And they told the king, “Here is Nathan the prophet.” And when he came
in before the king, he bowed before the king, with his face to the ground.
24And Nathan said, “My lord the king, have you said, ‘Adonijah shall reign
after me, and he shall sit on my throne’? 25For he has gone down this day
and n has sacrificed oxen, fattened cattle, and sheep in abundance, and has
invited all the king’s sons, the commanders [3] of the army, and Abiathar the
priest. And behold, they are eating and drinking before him, and saying,
p ‘Long live King Adonijah!’ 26 q But me, your servant, and Zadok the
priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and your servant Solomon he has
not invited. 27Has this thing been brought about by my lord the king and
you have not told your servants who should sit on the throne of my lord the
king after him?”
Solomon Anointed King
28Then King David answered, “Call Bathsheba to me.” So she came into the
king’s presence and stood before the king. 29And the king swore, saying,
r “As the LORD lives, who has redeemed my soul out of every adversity,
30
s as I swore to you by the LORD, the God of Israel, saying, ‘Solomon your
son shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne in my place,’ even so
will I do this day.” 31[†]Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the ground
and paid homage to the king and said, t “May my lord King David live
forever!”
32King David said, “Call to me Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada.” So they came before the king. 33[†]And the
king said to them, “Take with you u the servants of your lord and have
Solomon my son ride on my own mule, and bring him down to v Gihon.
34And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet there w anoint him king
over Israel. x Then blow the trumpet and say, y ‘Long live King Solomon!’
35You shall then come up after him, and he shall come and sit on my throne,
for he shall be king in my place. And I have appointed him to be ruler over
Israel and over Judah.” 36And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the
king, “Amen! May the LORD, the God of my lord the king, say so. 37 z As
the LORD has been with my lord the king, even so may he be with Solomon,
a and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord King David.”
38[†]So Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada, b and the Cherethites and the Pelethites went down and had
Solomon ride on King David’s mule and brought him to Gihon. 39[†]There
Zadok the priest took the horn of c oil from the tent and d anointed
Solomon. x Then they blew the trumpet, and all the people said, y “Long
live King Solomon!” 40And all the people went up after him, playing on
pipes, and rejoicing with great joy, so that the earth was split by their noise.
41[†]Adonijah and all the guests who were with him heard it as they
finished feasting. And when Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said,
“What does this uproar in the city mean?” 42While he was still speaking,
behold, e Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came. And Adonijah said,
“Come in, f for you are a worthy man and bring good news.” 43Jonathan
answered Adonijah, “No, for our lord King David has made Solomon king,
44and the king has sent with him Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the b Cherethites and the Pelethites. And
they had him ride on the king’s mule. 45And Zadok the priest and Nathan
the prophet have anointed him king at v Gihon, and they have gone up from
there rejoicing, so that the city is in an uproar. This is the noise that you
have heard. 46
g Solomon sits on the royal throne. 47Moreover, the king’s
servants came to congratulate our lord King David, saying, h ‘May your
God make the name of Solomon more famous than yours, and make his
throne greater than your throne.’ And the king i bowed himself on the bed.
48And the king also said, ‘Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, j who has
granted someone [4] to sit on my throne this day, my own eyes seeing it.’”
49Then all the guests of Adonijah trembled and rose, and each went his
own way.
50[†]And Adonijah feared Solomon. So he arose and went k and
took hold of l the horns of the altar.
51Then it was told Solomon, “Behold,
Adonijah fears King Solomon, for behold, he has laid hold of the horns of
the altar, saying, ‘Let King Solomon swear to me first that he will not put
his servant to death with the sword.’” 52And Solomon said, “If he will show
himself a worthy man, m not one of his hairs shall fall to the earth, but if
wickedness is found in him, he shall die.” 53So King Solomon sent, and
they brought him down from the altar. And he came and paid homage to
King Solomon, and Solomon said to him, “Go to your house.”
David’s Instructions to Solomon
1 KINGS 2 n When David’s time to die drew near, he commanded Solomon
his son, saying, 2[†] o “I am about to go the way of all the earth. p Be strong,
and show yourself a man, 3and keep the charge of the LORD your God,
walking in his ways and keeping his statutes, his commandments, his rules,
and his testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses, q that you may
prosper in all that you do and wherever you turn, 4[†]that the LORD may
r establish his word that he spoke concerning me, saying, s ‘If your sons pay
close attention to their way, t to walk before me in faithfulness with all their
heart and with all their soul, u you shall not lack [1] a man on the throne of
Israel.’
5[†]“Moreover, you also know what Joab the son of Zeruiah v did to me,
how he dealt with the two commanders of the armies of Israel, w Abner the
son of Ner, x and Amasa the son of Jether, whom he killed, avenging [2] in
time of peace for blood that had been shed in war, and putting the blood of
war [3] on the belt around his [4] waist and on the sandals on his feet. 6[†]Act
therefore y according to your wisdom, but do not let his gray head go down
to Sheol in peace. 7But deal loyally with the sons of z Barzillai the
Gileadite, and let them be a among those who eat at your table, b for with
such loyalty [5] they met me when I fled from Absalom your brother.
8And
there is also with you c Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjaminite from
Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse on the day d when I went to
Mahanaim. e But when he came down to meet me at the Jordan, I swore to
him by the LORD, saying, ‘I will not put you to death with the sword.’ 9Now
therefore do not hold him guiltless, f for you are a wise man. You will know
what you ought to do to him, and you shall g bring his gray head down with
blood to Sheol.”
The Death of David
10[†] h Then David slept with his fathers and was buried in i the city of
David. 11[†]And the time that David reigned over Israel was j forty years.
He reigned seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
12[†] k So Solomon sat on the throne of David his father, and his kingdom
was firmly established.
Solomon’s Reign Established
13Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of
Solomon. And she said, l “Do you come peacefully?” He said, “Peacefully.”
14Then he said, “I have something to say to you.” She said, “Speak.” 15He
said, “You know that m the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel fully
expected me to reign. However, the kingdom has turned about and become
my brother’s, n for it was his from the LORD.
16And now I have one request
to make of you; do not refuse me.” She said to him, “Speak.” 17[†]And he
said, “Please ask King Solomon—he will not refuse you—to give me
o Abishag the Shunammite as my wife.” 18Bathsheba said, “Very well; I
will speak for you to the king.”
19So Bathsheba went to King Solomon to speak to him on behalf of
Adonijah. And the king rose to meet her and bowed down to her. Then he
sat on his throne and had a seat brought for the king’s mother, p and she sat
on his right. 20Then she said, “I have one small request to make of you; do
not refuse me.” And the king said to her, “Make your request, my mother,
for I will not refuse you.” 21She said, “Let o Abishag the Shunammite be
given to Adonijah your brother as his wife.” 22[†]King Solomon answered
his mother, “And why do you ask o Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah?
Ask for him the kingdom also, q for he is my older brother, and on his side
r are Abiathar [6] the priest and Joab the son of Zeruiah.” 23Then King
Solomon swore by the LORD, saying, s “God do so to me and more also if
this word does not cost Adonijah his life! 24Now therefore t as the LORD
lives, who has established me and placed me on the throne of David my
father, and who has made me a house, u as he promised, Adonijah shall be
put to death today.” 25So King Solomon sent v Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,
and he struck him down, and he died.
26[†]And to Abiathar the priest the king said, “Go to w Anathoth, to your
estate, for you deserve death. But I will not at this time put you to death,
x because you carried the ark of the Lord GOD before David my father, y and
because you shared in all my father’s affliction.” 27[†] z So Solomon
expelled Abiathar from being priest to the LORD, thus fulfilling a the word
of the LORD that he had spoken concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.
28[†]When the news came to Joab—for Joab b had supported Adonijah
although c he had not supported Absalom—Joab fled to the tent of the LORD
and caught hold of the d horns of the altar.
29And when it was told King
Solomon, “Joab has fled to the tent of the LORD, and behold, he is beside
the altar,” Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, “Go, strike
him down.” 30So Benaiah came to the tent of the LORD and said to him,
“The king commands, ‘Come out.’” But he said, “No, I will die here.” Then
Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, “Thus said Joab, and thus he
answered me.” 31The king replied to him, e “Do as he has said, strike him
down and bury him, f and thus take away from me and from my father’s
house the guilt for the blood that Joab shed without cause. 32The LORD will
g bring back his bloody deeds on his own head, because, without the
knowledge of my father David, he attacked and killed with the sword two
men h more righteous and better than himself, i Abner the son of Ner,
commander of the army of Israel, and j Amasa the son of Jether,
commander of the army of Judah. 33
g So shall their blood come back on the
head of Joab and on the head of his descendants forever. But for David and
for his descendants and for his house and for his throne there shall be peace
from the LORD forevermore.” 34Then Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up
and struck him down and put him to death. And he was buried in his own
house in the wilderness. 35 k The king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada over
the army in place of Joab, and the king put l Zadok the priest m in the place
of Abiathar.
36[†]Then the king sent and summoned n Shimei and said to him, “Build
yourself a house in Jerusalem and dwell there, and do not go out from there
to any place whatever.
37For on the day you go out and cross o the brook
Kidron, know for certain that you shall die. p Your blood shall be on your
own head.” 38And Shimei said to the king, “What you say is good; as my
lord the king has said, so will your servant do.” So Shimei lived in
Jerusalem many days.
39But it happened at the end of three years that two of Shimei’s servants
ran away to q Achish, son of Maacah, king of Gath. And when it was told
Shimei, “Behold, your servants are in Gath,” 40Shimei arose and saddled a
donkey and went to Gath to Achish to seek his servants. Shimei went and
brought his servants from Gath. 41And when Solomon was told that Shimei
had gone from Jerusalem to Gath and returned, 42the king sent and
summoned Shimei and said to him, “Did I not make you swear by the LORD
and solemnly warn you, saying, ‘Know for certain that on the day you go
out and go to any place whatever, you shall die’? And you said to me,
‘What you say is good; I will obey.’ 43Why then have you not kept your
oath to the LORD and the commandment with which I commanded you?”
44The king also said to Shimei, “You know in your own heart r all the harm
that you did to David my father. So the LORD will s bring back your harm
on your own head. 45But King Solomon shall be blessed, t and the throne of
David shall be established before the LORD forever.” 46Then the king
commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and he went out and struck him
down, and he died.
u So the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.
Solomon’s Prayer for Wisdom