1 KINGS 18 [†] d After many days the word of the LORD came to Elijah, in
the third year, saying, “Go, show yourself to Ahab, and I will send rain
upon the earth.” 2So Elijah went to show himself to Ahab. Now the famine
was severe in Samaria. 3And Ahab called Obadiah, who was e over the
household. (Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly,
4and f when Jezebel cut
off the prophets of the LORD, Obadiah took a hundred prophets and hid
them by fifties in a cave and fed them with bread and water.) 5And Ahab
said to Obadiah, “Go through the land to all the springs of water and to all
the valleys. Perhaps we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive,
and not lose some of the animals.” 6So they divided the land between them
to pass through it. Ahab went in one direction by himself, and Obadiah went
in another direction by himself.
7And as Obadiah was on the way, behold, Elijah met him. And Obadiah
recognized him and fell on his face and said, “Is it you, my lord Elijah?”
8And he answered him, “It is I. Go, tell your lord, ‘Behold, Elijah is here.’”
9And he said, “How have I sinned, that you would give your servant into
the hand of Ahab, to kill me? 10 g As the LORD your God lives, there is no
nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent to seek you. And when they
would say, ‘He is not here,’ he would take an oath of the kingdom or nation,
that they had not found you. 11And now you say, ‘Go, tell your lord,
“Behold, Elijah is here.”’ 12And as soon as I have gone from you, h the
Spirit of the LORD will carry you I know not where. And so, when I come
and tell Ahab and he cannot find you, he will kill me, although I your
servant have feared the LORD from my youth. 13Has it not been told my lord
what I did i when Jezebel killed the prophets of the LORD, how I hid a
hundred men of the LORD’s prophets by fifties in a cave and fed them with
bread and water? 14And now you say, ‘Go, tell your lord, “Behold, Elijah is
here”’; and he will kill me.” 15And Elijah said, g “As the LORD of hosts
lives, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself to him today.” 16So
Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him. And Ahab went to meet Elijah.
17[†]When Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab said to him, j “Is it you, you k troubler
of Israel?” 18And he answered, “I have not troubled Israel, but you have,
and your father’s house, because you have l abandoned the commandments
of the LORD and m followed the Baals. 19Now therefore send and gather all
Israel to me at Mount n Carmel, and the o 450 prophets of Baal and p the
400 prophets of Asherah, q who eat at Jezebel’s table.”
The Prophets of Baal Defeated
20[†]So Ahab sent to all the people of Israel and gathered the prophets
together at Mount Carmel. 21[†]And Elijah came near to all the people and
said, “How long r will you go limping between two different opinions? s If
the LORD is God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.” And the people
did not answer him a word. 22[†]Then Elijah said to the people, t “I, even I
only, am left a prophet of the LORD, but Baal’s prophets are u 450 men.
23Let two bulls be given to us, and let them choose one bull for themselves
and cut it in pieces and lay it on the wood, but put no fire to it. And I will
prepare the other bull and lay it on the wood and put no fire to it. 24[†]And
you call upon the name of your god, and I will call upon the name of the
LORD, and the God who v answers by fire, he is God.” And all the people
answered, “It is well spoken.” 25Then Elijah said to the prophets of Baal,
“Choose for yourselves one bull and prepare it first, for you are many, and
call upon the name of your god, but put no fire to it.” 26And they took the
bull that was given them, and they prepared it and called upon the name of
Baal from morning until noon, saying, “O Baal, answer us!” But there was
no voice, and no one answered. And they limped around the altar that they
had made. 27[†]And at noon Elijah mocked them, saying, “Cry aloud, for he
is a god. Either he is musing, or he is relieving himself, or he is on a
journey, or perhaps he is asleep and must be awakened.” 28[†]And they
cried aloud and w cut themselves after their custom with swords and lances,
until the blood gushed out upon them. 29And as midday passed, they raved
on until the time of x the offering of the oblation, but there was no voice. No
one answered; no one paid attention.
30[†]Then Elijah said to all the people, “Come near to me.” And all the
people came near to him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD that had
been y thrown down. 31Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number
of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of the LORD came,
saying, z “Israel shall be your name,” 32and with the stones he built an altar
in the name of the LORD. And he made a trench about the altar, as great as
would contain two seahs [1] of seed. 33 a And he put the wood in order and
cut the bull in pieces and laid it on the wood. And he said, “Fill four jars
with water and b pour it on the burnt offering and on the wood.” 34And he
said, “Do it a second time.” And they did it a second time. And he said, “Do
it a third time.” And they did it a third time. 35[†]And the water ran around
the altar and filled the trench also with water.
36[†]And at the time of c the offering of the oblation, Elijah the prophet
came near and said, “O LORD, d God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be
known this day that e you are God in Israel, and that I am your servant, and
that f I have done all these things at your word. 37Answer me, O LORD,
answer me, that this people may know that you, O LORD, are God, and that
you have turned their hearts back.” 38[†] g Then the fire of the LORD fell and
consumed the burnt offering and the wood and the stones and the dust, and
licked up the water that was in the trench. 39And when all the people saw it,
they fell on their faces and said, h “The LORD, he is God; the LORD, he is
God.” 40And Elijah said to them, “Seize the prophets of Baal; let not one of
them escape.” And they seized them. And Elijah brought them down to i the
brook Kishon and j slaughtered them there.
The LORD Sends Rain
41And Elijah said to Ahab, “Go up, eat and drink, for there is a sound of the
rushing of rain.” 42[†]So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went
up to the top of Mount Carmel. k And he bowed himself down on the earth
and put his face between his knees. 43And he said to his servant, “Go up
now, look toward the sea.” And he went up and looked and said, “There is
nothing.” And he said, “Go again,” seven times. 44And at the seventh time
he said, “Behold, l a little cloud like a man’s hand is rising from the sea.”
And he said, “Go up, say to Ahab, ‘Prepare your chariot and go down, lest
the rain stop you.’” 45[†]And in a little while the heavens grew black with
clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode and went to
m Jezreel. 46
n And the hand of the LORD was on Elijah, o and he gathered up
his garment and ran before Ahab to the entrance of p Jezreel.
Elijah Flees Jezebel