1 KINGS 17 [†]Now Elijah the Tishbite, of s Tishbe [1] in Gilead, said to
Ahab, t “As the LORD, the God of Israel, lives, u before whom I stand,
v there shall be neither dew nor rain these years, except by my word.” 2And
the word of the LORD came to him: 3“Depart from here and turn eastward
and hide yourself by the brook Cherith, which is east of the Jordan. 4You
shall drink from the brook, and I have commanded the ravens to feed you
there.” 5[†]So he went and did according to the word of the LORD. He went
and lived by the brook Cherith that is east of the Jordan. 6And the ravens
brought him bread and meat in the morning, and bread and meat in the
evening, and he drank from the brook. 7And after a while the brook dried
up, because there was no rain in the land.
The Widow of Zarephath
8Then the word of the LORD came to him, 9[†]“Arise, go to w Zarephath,
which belongs to Sidon, and dwell there. Behold, I have commanded a
widow there to feed you.” 10So he arose and went to w Zarephath. And
when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there x gathering
sticks. And he called to her and said, “Bring me a little water in a vessel,
that I may drink.” 11And as she was going to bring it, he called to her and
said, “Bring me a morsel of bread in your hand.” 12And she said, t “As the
LORD your God lives, I have nothing baked, only a handful of flour in a jar
and a little oil in a jug. And now I am gathering a couple of sticks that I may
go in and prepare it for myself and my son, that we may eat it and die.”
13[†]And Elijah said to her, “Do not fear; go and do as you have said. But
first make me a little cake of it and bring it to me, and afterward make
something for yourself and your son. 14For thus says the LORD, the God of
Israel, ‘The jar of flour shall not be spent, and the jug of oil shall not be
empty, until the day that the LORD sends rain upon the earth.’” 15And she
went and did as Elijah said. And she and he and her household ate for many
days. 16The jar of flour was not spent, neither did the jug of oil become
empty, according to the word of the LORD that he spoke by Elijah.
Elijah Raises the Widow’s Son
17After this the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, became ill.
And his illness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. 18[†]And
she said to Elijah, y “What have you against me, O z man of God? You have
come to me to bring my sin to remembrance and to cause the death of my
son!” 19And he said to her, “Give me your son.” And he took him from her
arms and carried him up into the upper chamber where he lodged, and laid
him on his own bed. 20And he cried to the LORD, “O LORD my God, have
you brought calamity even upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by killing
her son?” 21[†] a Then he stretched himself upon the child three times and
cried to the LORD, “O LORD my God, let this child’s life [2] come into him
again.” 22And the LORD listened to the voice of Elijah. And the life of the
child came into him again, and b he revived. 23And Elijah took the child and
brought him down from the upper chamber into the house and delivered
him to his mother. And Elijah said, “See, your son lives.” 24And the woman
said to Elijah, c “Now I know that you are a man of God, and that the word
of the LORD in your mouth is truth.”
Elijah Confronts Ahab