1 KINGS 19 [†]Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and how q he had
killed all the prophets with the sword. 2Then Jezebel sent a messenger to
Elijah, saying, r “So may the gods do to me and more also, if I do not make
your life as the life of one of them by this time tomorrow.” 3[†]Then he was
afraid, and he arose and ran for his life and came to s Beersheba, which
belongs to Judah, and left his servant there.
4But he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness and came and
sat down under a broom tree. t And he asked that he might die, saying, “It is
enough; now, O LORD, take away my life, for I am no better than my
fathers.” 5[†]And he lay down and slept under a broom tree. And behold, an
angel touched him and said to him, “Arise and eat.” 6And he looked, and
behold, there was at his head a cake baked on hot stones and a jar of water.
And he ate and drank and lay down again. 7[†]And the angel of the LORD
came again a second time and touched him and said, “Arise and eat, for the
journey is too great for you.” 8[†]And he arose and ate and drank, and went
in the strength of that food u forty days and forty nights to v Horeb, the
mount of God.
The LORD Speaks to Elijah
9There he came to a cave and lodged in it. And behold, w the word of the
LORD came to him, and he said to him, “What are you doing here, Elijah?”
10[†]He said, “I have been very x jealous for the LORD, the God of hosts.
For the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, y thrown down your
altars, and z killed your prophets with the sword, a and I, even I only, am
left, and they seek my life, to take it away.” 11[†]And he said, “Go out and
b stand on the mount before the LORD.” And behold, the LORD passed by,
and c a great and strong wind tore the mountains and broke in pieces the
rocks before the LORD, but the LORD was not in the wind. And after the
wind d an earthquake, but the LORD was not in the earthquake. 12And after
the earthquake a fire, but the LORD was not in the fire. And after the fire the
sound of a low whisper. [1] 13[†]And when Elijah heard it, e he wrapped his
face in his cloak and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. And
behold, f there came a voice to him and said, “What are you doing here,
Elijah?” 14He said, x “I have been very jealous for the LORD, the God of
hosts. For the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, y thrown down
your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword, and I, even I only, am
left, and they seek my life, to take it away.” 15[†]And the LORD said to him,
“Go, return on your way to the wilderness of Damascus. And when you
arrive, you shall anoint Hazael to be king over Syria. 16
g And Jehu the son
of Nimshi you shall anoint to be king over Israel, and h Elisha the son of
Shaphat of Abel-meholah you shall anoint to be prophet in your place.
17And the one who escapes from i the sword of Hazael j shall Jehu put to
death, and the one who escapes from the sword of Jehu k shall Elisha put to
death. 18 l Yet I will leave seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have
not bowed to Baal, and every mouth that has not m kissed him.”
The Call of Elisha
19[†]So he departed from there and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who
was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen in front of him, and he was with the
twelfth. Elijah passed by him and cast n his cloak upon him. 20[†]And he
left the oxen and ran after Elijah and said, o “Let me kiss my father and my
mother, and then I will follow you.” And he said to him, “Go back again,
for what have I done to you?” 21And he returned from following him and
took the yoke of oxen and sacrificed them and boiled their flesh p with the
yokes of the oxen and gave it to the people, and they ate. Then he arose and
went after Elijah and assisted him.
Ahab’s Wars with Syria