1 KINGS 3 [†] v Solomon made a marriage alliance with Pharaoh king of
Egypt. He took Pharaoh’s daughter and brought her into w the city of David
until he had finished x building his own house y and the house of the LORD
z and the wall around Jerusalem. 2[†] a The people were sacrificing at the
high places, however, because no house had yet been built for the name of
the LORD.
3Solomon b loved the LORD, c walking in the statutes of David his father,
only he sacrificed and made offerings at the high places. 4And the king
went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, d for that was the great high place.
Solomon used to offer a thousand burnt offerings on that altar.
5 e At Gibeon
f the LORD appeared to Solomon g in a dream by night, and God said, “Ask
what I shall give you.” 6And Solomon said, “You have shown great and
steadfast love to your servant David my father, because h he walked before
you in faithfulness, in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart toward
you. And you have kept for him this great and steadfast love and i have
given him a son to sit on his throne this day.
7[†]And now, O LORD my God,
j you have made your servant king in place of David my father, k although I
am but a little child. I do not know l how to go out or come in. 8
m And your
servant is in the midst of your people whom you have chosen, a great
people, n too many to be numbered or counted for multitude. 9 o Give your
servant therefore an understanding mind p to govern your people, that I may
q discern between good and evil, for who is able to govern this your great
people?”
10It pleased the Lord that Solomon had asked this. 11[†]And God said to
him, “Because you have asked this, and have not asked for yourself long
life or riches or the life of your enemies, but have asked for yourself
understanding to discern what is right, 12behold, r I now do according to
your word. Behold, s I give you a wise and discerning mind, so that none
like you has been before you and none like you shall arise after you. 13 t I
give you also what you have not asked, u both riches and honor, so that no
other king shall compare with you, all your days. 14And if you will walk in
my ways, keeping my statutes and my commandments, v as your father
David walked, then w I will lengthen your days.”
15And Solomon x awoke, and behold, it was a dream. Then he came to
Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and offered
up burnt offerings and peace offerings, and made a feast for all his servants.
Solomon’s Wisdom
16[†]Then two prostitutes came to the king y and stood before him. 17The
one woman said, “Oh, my lord, this woman and I live in the same house,
and I gave birth to a child while she was in the house. 18Then on the third
day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth. And we were alone.
There was no one else with us in the house; only we two were in the house.
19And this woman’s son died in the night, because she lay on him. 20And
she arose at midnight and took my son from beside me, while your servant
slept, and laid him at her breast, and laid her dead son at my breast. 21When
I rose in the morning to nurse my child, behold, he was dead. But when I
looked at him closely in the morning, behold, he was not the child that I had
borne.” 22But the other woman said, “No, the living child is mine, and the
dead child is yours.” The first said, “No, the dead child is yours, and the
living child is mine.” Thus they spoke before the king.
23Then the king said, “The one says, ‘This is my son that is alive, and
your son is dead’; and the other says, ‘No; but your son is dead, and my son
is the living one.’” 24And the king said, “Bring me a sword.” So a sword
was brought before the king. 25And the king said, “Divide the living child
in two, and give half to the one and half to the other.” 26Then the woman
whose son was alive said to the king, because z her heart yearned for her
son, “Oh, my lord, give her the living child, and by no means put him to
death.” But the other said, “He shall be neither mine nor yours; divide him.”
27[†]Then the king answered and said, “Give the living child to the first
woman, and by no means put him to death; she is his mother.” 28And all
Israel heard of the judgment that the king had rendered, and they stood in
awe of the king, because they perceived that a the wisdom of God was in
him to do justice.
Solomon’s Officials