1 KINGS 21 [†]Now Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard in q Jezreel, beside
the palace of Ahab king of Samaria. 2And after this Ahab said to Naboth,
r “Give me your vineyard, that I may have it for a vegetable garden,
because it is near my house, and I will give you a better vineyard for it; or,
if it seems good to you, I will give you its value in money.” 3[†]But Naboth
said to Ahab, “The LORD forbid s that I should give you the inheritance of
my fathers.” 4And Ahab t went into his house vexed and sullen because of
what Naboth the Jezreelite had said to him, for he had said, “I will not give
you the inheritance of my fathers.” And he lay down on his bed and turned
away his face and would eat no food.
5But Jezebel his wife came to him and said to him, “Why is your spirit so
vexed that you eat no food?” 6And he said to her, “Because I spoke to
Naboth the Jezreelite and said to him, ‘Give me your vineyard for money,
or else, if it please you, I will give you another vineyard for it.’ And he
answered, ‘I will not give you my vineyard.’” 7[†]And Jezebel his wife said
to him, “Do you now govern Israel? Arise and eat bread and let your heart
be cheerful; I will give you the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.”
8[†] u So she wrote letters in Ahab’s name and sealed them with his seal,
and she sent the letters to v the elders and the leaders who lived with Naboth
in his city.
9And she wrote in the letters, “Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth at
the head of the people. 10And set two w worthless men opposite him, and let
them bring a charge against him, saying, x ‘You have cursed [1] God and the
king.’ Then take him out and stone him to death.” 11And the men of his city,
v the elders and the leaders who lived in his city, did as Jezebel had sent
word to them. As it was written in the letters that she had sent to them,
12
y they proclaimed a fast and set Naboth at the head of the people. 13And
the two worthless men came in and sat opposite him. And the worthless
men brought a charge against Naboth in the presence of the people, saying,
“Naboth cursed God and the king.” So they took him outside the city and
stoned him to death with stones. 14Then they sent to Jezebel, saying,
“Naboth has been stoned; he is dead.”
15[†]As soon as Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned and was dead,
Jezebel said to Ahab, “Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the
Jezreelite, which he refused to give you for money, for Naboth is not alive,
but dead.” 16And as soon as Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, Ahab arose
to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it.
The LORD Condemns Ahab
17 z Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 18“Arise,
go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who is in a Samaria; behold, he is in
the vineyard of Naboth, where he has gone to take possession. 19[†]And you
shall say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, “Have you killed and also taken
possession?”’ And you shall say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD: b “In the
place where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick your own
blood.”’”
20Ahab said to Elijah, c “Have you found me, O my enemy?” He
answered, “I have found you, because d you have sold yourself to do what
is evil in the sight of the LORD.
21Behold, I will bring disaster upon you. I
will utterly burn you up, and e will cut off from Ahab every male, bond or
free, in Israel. 22And I will make your house like f the house of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, and like g the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the
anger to which you have provoked me, and because you h have made Israel
to sin. 23[†]And of Jezebel the LORD also said, i ‘The dogs shall eat Jezebel
within j the walls of Jezreel.’ 24 k Anyone belonging to Ahab who dies in the
city the dogs shall eat, and anyone of his who dies in the open country the
birds of the heavens shall eat.”
Ahab’s Repentance
25( l There was none who sold himself to do what was evil in the sight of the
LORD like Ahab, whom Jezebel his wife incited. 26He acted very
abominably in going after m idols, as n the Amorites had done, whom the
LORD cast out before the people of Israel.)
27And when Ahab heard those words, he o tore his clothes and p put
sackcloth on his flesh and q fasted and lay in sackcloth and went about
dejectedly.
28And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
29[†]“Have you seen how Ahab has humbled himself before me? Because
he has humbled himself before me, I will not bring the disaster in his days;
r but in his son’s days I will bring the disaster upon his house.”
Ahab and the False Prophets