1 PETER 5 [†]So I exhort the elders among you, m as a fellow elder and n a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, as well as a partaker in the glory that is
going to be revealed: 2[†] o shepherd the flock of God that is among you,
exercising oversight, [1] p not under compulsion, but willingly, as God
would have you; [2] q not for shameful gain, but eagerly; 3not r domineering
over those in your charge, but s being examples to the flock. 4[†]And when
t the chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the u unfading v crown of
glory.
5[†]Likewise, you who are younger, be subject to the elders. w Clothe
yourselves, all of you, with humility toward one another, for x “God
opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.”
6[†] x Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God so that
at the proper time he may exalt you, 7[†] y casting all your anxieties on him,
because z he cares for you. 8[†] a Be sober-minded; b be watchful. Your
c adversary the devil d prowls around e like a roaring lion, seeking someone
to devour.
9[†] f Resist him, g firm in your faith, knowing that h the same
kinds of suffering are being experienced by your brotherhood throughout
the world. 10[†]And i after you have suffered a little while, the God of all
grace, j who has called you to his k eternal glory in Christ, will himself
l restore, m confirm, strengthen, and establish you. 11
n To him be the
dominion forever and ever. Amen.
Final Greetings
12[†]By o Silvanus, a faithful brother as I regard him, p I have written
briefly to you, exhorting and declaring that this is q the true grace of God.
r Stand firm in it. 13[†]She who is at Babylon, who is likewise chosen,
sends you greetings, and so does s Mark, my son. 14[†] t Greet one another
with the kiss of love.
u Peace to all of you who are in Christ.
Study Notes for 1 Peter
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:1–2 Opening. Peter identifies himself as the author.
The readers are identified as “elect exiles” and their salvation is credited
to the work of the Father, Spirit, and Son.
FACT
The Greek phrase translated preparing your minds for action (1:13) was
used to describe the action of wrapping one’s robes around one’s belt
before beginning some physical activity. The modern equivalent would
be “rolling up your sleeves.” Christians should be prepared to fully
engage their minds in their service for Christ.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:1 Peter calls himself an apostle, an authoritative
messenger of Jesus Christ (see note on Rom. 1:1). The people receiving his
letter are elect exiles of the Dispersion. Peter is not speaking of a literal
exile (compare 1 Pet. 1:17; 2:11). Believers long for their true home in the
new world that is coming and for their end-time inheritance. Thus, they do
not conform to the values and worldviews of this present evil age.
Believers, both Jews and Gentiles, are God’s “elect exiles.” They are his
chosen people, just as Israel was God’s chosen people in the OT (Deut. 7:6–
8; Ps. 106:5; Isa. 45:4).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:2 Foreknowledge does not merely refer to God’s
knowing ahead of time that his people would belong to him. It also means
that he chose them (compare Rom. 8:29). in the sanctification of the
Spirit. Either conversion or gradual progress in the Christian life, or
possibly both. The Spirit sets apart God’s people. Believers are now holy
and righteous in their standing before God. They also live in ways that show
they are increasingly dedicated to God. For obedience to Jesus Christ may
refer to conversion, when Christians confessed Jesus as Lord (Rom. 10:9),
or to God’s purpose for their lives, that they obey Christ. For sprinkling
with his blood refers to Christ’s atoning work on the cross. There all the
believers’ sins were washed away. Peter may be referring to believers’
entrance into a covenant with God (similar to Ex. 24:3–8), to their growth
in holiness, or possibly to both (similar to Lev. 14:6–7; compare Ps. 51:7; 1
John 1:7).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:3–2:10 Called to Salvation as Exiles. Believers
must praise God for his promised salvation and live out that salvation
daily.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:3 caused us to be born again. Peter may be
connecting “born again” to through the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The
new birth was possible because God caused believers in Christ to be united
to him in his resurrection (compare Rom. 6:4; Eph. 2:5–6; Col. 3:1). Or
Peter may be linking the resurrection to the living hope of believers. The
hope of Christians is that Christ’s resurrection is a promise of their own
future resurrection.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:4 The “hope” of v. 3 is now described as an
inheritance. This word often describes the Promised Land and Israel’s
place in it (Num. 32:19; Deut. 25:19; Josh. 11:23; Ps. 105:11). The OT
inheritance points to an even greater inheritance reserved in heaven for the
new covenant people.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:5 Salvation in this context is a further description of
the inheritance in v. 4 and the hope in v. 3.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:6–7 Little while covers all their earthly life before they
inherit future salvation. if necessary. Their sufferings are God’s will. He
wants their faith to be purified and shown to be real. revelation of Jesus
Christ. Christ’s return.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:10–11 The OT prophets did not know when their
prophecies would come true, but they did foretell that Christ would suffer
and then be glorified. See Overview of the Bible. The Spirit of Christ is
the Holy Spirit, who was speaking through the prophets.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:12 you. That is, NT believers. Angels long to
understand fully what has been accomplished. Christians have heard this
good news in the gospel proclaimed to them.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:13–21 The inheritance promised to followers of Christ
should motivate them to set their hope entirely on their future reward (vv.
13–16) and to live in fear of the God who redeemed them at the cost of his
own Son (vv. 17–21).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:14–15 Christians are to be holy (see Lev. 18:2–4),
because God is holy and has called believers to be like him.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:17 Who judges impartially may refer only to the final
judgment, when believers will be judged according to their deeds (compare
Rom. 2:6; 2 Cor. 5:10). More likely, Peter has in mind both this present life
and the last day. fear. Of God’s discipline and fatherly displeasure. exile.
Compare 1 Pet. 1:1.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:18–19 you were ransomed from the futile ways
inherited from your forefathers. “Ransom” recalls Israel’s deliverance
from Egypt (Deut. 15:15). Believers are delivered from a life of futility and
meaninglessness to one of great significance. lamb without blemish or
spot. This image points to the OT sacrifices. It especially refers to Christ as
the Passover Lamb (Exodus 12) and the servant of the Lord (compare
“lamb,” Isa. 53:7). As the perfect sacrifice, Christ atoned for the sins of the
unrighteous (compare John 1:29; 1 Pet. 3:18).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:20–21 God planned when he would send Christ (Christ
was foreknown, compare v. 2). He chose to reveal him at the time in
history when these believers lived (for the sake of you).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:22–2:10 Since Christians have been given new life by
the Word of God, they are to love one another fervently (1:22–25). They are
to long for God’s Word so that they will continue to grow in faith (2:1–3).
They are like living stones which together build up a spiritual house, with
Jesus as the cornerstone (2:4–8). They are chosen by God to be his people
(2:9–10).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:22 purified. See note on v. 2. truth. That is, the
gospel.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:23 living and abiding word of God. All written
Scripture (see v. 25), but especially the gospel.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 1:24–25 Peter cites Isa. 40:6, 8 to contrast the weakness
of human flesh with the power of the word of the Lord.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:1–2 newborn infants. Peter is not saying that believers
are immature in their faith. He means all Christians are to be like infants in
their longing for pure spiritual milk, which likely refers to God’s Word
(compare 1:23–25).
Regeneration in the New Testament
John 1:13 “born . . . of God”
John 3:3 “born again”
John 3:5 “born of water and the Spirit”
John 3:6 “born of the Spirit”
John 3:7 “born again”
John 3:8 “born of the Spirit”
Eph. 2:4–5 “God . . . even when we were dead . . . made us alive together with Christ”
Col. 2:13 “you, who were dead . . . God made alive together with him”
Titus 3:5 “he saved us . . . by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit”
James 1:18 “he brought us forth by the word of truth”
1 Pet. 1:3 “he has caused us to be born again”
1 Pet. 1:23 “you have been born again”
1 John 2:29 “everyone who practices righteousness has been born of him”
1 John 3:9 “No one born of God makes a practice of sinning”
1 John 4:7 “whoever loves has been born of God”
1 John 5:1 “Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God”
1 John 5:4 “everyone who has been born of God overcomes the world”
1 John 5:18 “everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning”
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:3 Christians will continue to long for the Word if they
have tasted that the Lord is good, which they did in conversion (compare
Ps. 34:8). In writing this letter, Peter may well have thought about Psalm
34, which stresses how the Lord delivers the righteous in their sufferings
(compare 1 Pet. 3:10–12 and Ps. 34:12–13).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:4 As you come to him indicates a daily personal
relationship with Christ. living stone. Jesus is the foundation of God’s new
temple. He is God’s elect (chosen) one. He is honored above all.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:5 Believers are living stones in God’s new temple
(spiritual house). Since the pieces that make up the house are “living,” the
house itself is growing: you yourselves . . . are being built up. The OT
temple anticipated the new temple where God dwells (that is, in his people).
But believers are not only God’s temple. They are also a holy priesthood,
which offers spiritual sacrifices (compare Ex. 19:5–6; see also Rom. 12:1;
Phil. 4:18; Heb. 13:15–16) by the power of the Holy Spirit.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:6 Peter cites Isa. 28:16 (compare Rom. 9:33; 10:11) in
support of the idea that Jesus is the cornerstone (see note on Eph. 2:20) of
God’s temple. Those who trust in him will be saved on judgment day.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:7 Unbelievers will find this prophecy from Ps. 118:22
fulfilled. The stone the builders rejected is Jesus, the foundation of God’s
temple, his new people.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:8 stumbling. Tripping over the truth of the gospel.
Unbelievers fall because they do not walk with God. In doing so,
unbelievers fulfill this prophecy from Isa. 8:14. There the stone God has
established becomes the means of their falling. They stumble because they
disobey the word, as they were destined to do. Some understand this to
teach that God has not predestined who will disobey. He has only
determined the result of disobedience (that is, that those who disobey will
stumble). But Peter probably teaches that God directs all that will occur (see
note on Eph. 1:11). In teaching this, Peter still does not deny human
responsibility (they “stumble because they disobey”).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:9 a chosen race. God has elected (“chosen”) some to
be his people. Therefore no one can boast about being included. Peter views
the church as a new Israel. He cites what is said of Israel in Ex. 19:5–6 and
applies it to the church.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:10 Peter echoes texts in Hosea that refer to Israel (Hos.
1:6, 9, 10; 2:23) and says they are fulfilled in the church.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:11–4:11 Living as Strangers to Bring Glory to God in
a Hostile World. Believers should live as exiles in a world that rejects their
message. They bear witness to the gospel when they live in a way that
pleases God.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:11 Beloved signals a major new section in the letter
(compare 4:12). Believers are sojourners and exiles (compare 1:1, 17).
They await their end-time inheritance. wage war against your soul.
Holding on to sinful desires brings spiritual harm.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:12 Peter refers to unbelievers as Gentiles. This reflects
his understanding of believers as a new Israel (see note on 1:1). glorify
God. See Matt. 5:16. On the day of visitation may refer to the believer’s
initial conversion through the regenerating work (“visitation”) of the Holy
Spirit. Or it may refer to how those who become believers will glorify God
on judgment day.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:13–3:12 Peter exhorts Christians to goodness as
citizens (2:13–17), slaves (2:18–25), wives (3:1–6), and husbands (3:7).
The section is summed up in 3:8–12: those who imitate Christ and pursue
goodness will receive an eternal reward.
FACT
What is God’s purpose for civil government? God has established civil
governments around the world in order to punish wrongdoers and
promote the good of society (Rom. 13:1–4). Peter teaches believers to
“be subject for the Lord’s sake to every human institution” (1 Pet. 2:13–
17; see 1 Tim. 2:1–2).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:13–14 Be subject. Compare Rom. 13:1–7.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:15 The godly lives of believers will put to silence
false charges raised against them.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:16 Compare Gal. 5:13–14.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:18 On slavery in the Greco-Roman world, see note on
1 Cor. 7:21. Servants (bondservants) often entered into service to pay off a
debt. They were not owned forever without their consent. There were laws
to protect bondservants. Still, masters were often unjust. Bondservants who
served faithfully in these circumstances gave a witness of Christ’s suffering.
This verse does not mean that servants were to endure anything the masters
did to them.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:19–20 Gracious thing comes from the Greek word for
“grace.” Here it seems to be synonymous with credit. Both words indicate
that God will reward his people if they endure suffering righteously.
Compare Luke 6:34–35. “Gracious thing” could also mean that patient
endurance of suffering is evidence of God’s grace at work.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:22–23 This crucial verse emphasizes Christ’s
sinlessness (committed no sin) and his substitutionary death for sinners
(compare 3:18; see also Isa. 52:13–53:12). Jesus’ freedom from deceit
alludes to Isa. 53:9.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 2:24 Tree was often used as a synonym for “cross” in
first-century Judaism. This may have been due to Deut. 21:22–23 (see Gal.
3:13; also Acts 5:30; and see note on crucifixion at Matt. 27:35). The
unique, substitutionary, sin-bearing death of Jesus is described here using
allusions to Isa. 53:4, 5, 11. healed. The healing in the atonement refers to
the forgiveness of sins. Jesus’ death should lead to a profound change in the
lives of believers. They should break all ties with evil (die to sin) and
devote themselves to living in a holy way (live to righteousness).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:1–2 A husband is to be the leader in the home
(compare Eph. 5:22–33; Col. 3:18–19). A wife is to be subject to (see 1
Pet. 3:5–6) and follow her husband’s leadership. If a wife has an
unbelieving husband who is disobedient to the word (that is, the gospel),
she should not try to pressure him into converting. Instead, her godly
conduct will demonstrate the truth of the gospel without a word. your
own husbands. Scripture never says that women in general are to be
subject to men in general. It does support male headship in the home (see
also Titus 2:5) and in the church (see 1 Tim. 2:11–15; 3:2–3; and notes).
Scripture also establishes the equality of man and woman as being made in
the image of God (Gen. 1:27; see 1 Pet. 3:7).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:1 It was unusual for a wife to have a different religion
than her husband in Roman culture. Peter calls on wives to submit to their
husbands, but it was a different submission than was common. The wives’
devotion was first and foremost to Christ, not their husbands.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:3–4 Do not let your adorning be external. Examples
of “external . . . adorning” can be seen in portraits and sculptures from the
first century. The elaborate braiding of women’s hair and the wearing of
attention-grabbing jewelry were common in upper-class Roman society.
Peter is not literally prohibiting all braiding of hair or all wearing of gold
jewelry. Instead, he warns against being more concerned about personal
appearance than personal character.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:6 Sarah obeyed Abraham. Peter describes Sarah’s
submission in terms of obedience. This does not mean the relationship
between husbands and wives is like that of parents and children. It shows
that a wife is to follow her husband’s leadership. calling him lord. See
Gen. 18:12. do not fear. Peter calls on wives to trust God as Sarah did and
not fear even the difficult things they face.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:7 Peter’s advice to husbands is briefer, perhaps
because they are less likely to be mistreated than bondservants and wives.
The word likewise is a transition (compare v. 1; 5:5). It does not imply that
husbands should submit to their wives the way that wives submit to them
(see Eph. 5:21–33). To live . . . in an understanding way probably
includes understanding the needs of the wife. Weaker vessel probably
means that men are generally physically stronger than women and therefore
they may be tempted to threaten their wives through physical or verbal
abuse. heirs . . . of the grace of life. Peter does not think women are
inferior to men, for both are equally made in God’s image (compare Gal.
3:28). If husbands do not treat their wives in a godly way, the Lord will pay
no attention to their prayers.
FACT
Husbands and wives. Peter’s statement about wives being heirs with their
husbands (3:7) was revolutionary. In Roman tradition, the husband
usually decided which religion his family would follow. Christian
husbands, however, are to honor their wives as their equals in God’s sight
(see Gal. 3:28).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:8–9 Finally, all of you begins a list of godly virtues
that all believers should model at all times.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:10–12 Peter draws on Ps. 34:12–16 (see note on 1 Pet.
2:3). To love life and see good days results from God’s “blessing” (3:9).
Peter continues his quotation of Psalm 34: For the eyes of the Lord are on
the righteous (to observe and care for them) and his ears are open to their
prayer (for various needs and concerns). This does not mean that God
keeps obedient believers from suffering (compare 1 Pet. 2:19–23; 3:14, 17;
4:12–19). It means that God will provide his grace “to strengthen and
establish” believers in times of suffering (5:10) and great need (compare 2
Cor. 12:9; Heb. 4:16).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:13–4:11 Believers are to endure hardship, knowing
that they will receive a final reward (3:13–17). Christ suffered at his death
but was raised from the dead, and thus has triumphed over all demonic
powers (3:18–22). Christians are urged to give themselves wholly to God,
being willing to suffer and do what is right (4:1–6). Expectation of the end
times should motivate believers to live in a way that pleases God and to
exercise their spiritual gifts (4:7–11).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:13–14 even if. Peter writes to Christians already
suffering for their faith. Therefore he is not saying that such suffering is
unlikely. His point is that no one will ultimately or finally harm Christians
because no one can take Christ from them (see Rom. 8:31). Indeed, they
will be blessed by God in their sufferings (compare Matt. 5:10).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:15–17 Believers should always be ready to provide a
reason for their faith. They should do so kindly and engagingly. If they keep
a good conscience because their behavior is correct, any accusations
against them will prove false. Their accusers will be put to shame.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:18 This is a key statement on the substitutionary
atonement of Christ. He suffered and died as the righteous one in place of
the unrighteous, in order to bring us to God. being put to death in the
flesh but made alive in the spirit. Jesus died physically but was raised
from the dead by the Holy Spirit.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:19 spirits in prison. There is much debate about the
identity of these spirits. The Greek term can mean either human spirits or
angels, depending on the context (compare Num. 27:16; Acts 7:59; Heb.
12:23). (1) Some interpreters say that “spirits” refers to the unsaved human
spirits of Noah’s day. Christ, “in the spirit” (1 Pet. 3:18), preached the
gospel “in the days of Noah” (v. 20) through Noah. Unbelievers who heard
“did not obey . . . in the days of Noah” (v. 20). They are now suffering
judgment. (2) Others believe that the spirits are fallen angels who were cast
into hell to await the final judgment. In this case the message that Christ
proclaimed is almost certainly one of triumph, after having been “put to
death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit” (v. 18). (3) Others have
advocated that Christ offered a second chance of salvation to those in hell.
This interpretation, however, is in direct contradiction with other Scripture
(see Luke 16:26; Heb. 9:27) and with the rest of 1 Peter and therefore must
be rejected, leaving either of the first two views as the most likely
interpretation.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 3:21 Peter compares salvation in the ark and baptism. In
both, believers are saved through the waters of judgment, since baptism
portrays salvation through judgment. Baptism saves you because it
represents inward faith. Without faith, baptism does nothing more than
remove dirt from the body. Faith is shown by one’s appeal to God for the
forgiveness of one’s sins (for a good conscience). Furthermore, baptism
“saves” only because it is grounded in the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Christians have disagreed about the proper mode of water baptism
from the early history of the church. Yet Christians have generally agreed
that water baptism is an outward sign of the inward work of the Holy Spirit
(compare John 3:5; Titus 3:5).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:1–2 Since therefore Christ suffered. Christ’s
suffering again functions as a model for readers. whoever has suffered in
the flesh has ceased from sin. Two likely interpretations have been
suggested: (1) This refers to the believer being dead to the power of sin, as a
result of having died with Christ (compare Rom. 6:1–11). (2) More likely, it
means that when believers are willing to endure suffering for the sake of
Christ they show that their purpose in life is not to live for their own
pleasures but according to the will of God and for his glory.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:6 the gospel was preached even to those who are
dead. Some think that Peter offers a chance to accept Christ after death for
those who rejected him while they were alive. This view contradicts both
the clear teaching of Scripture (e.g., Luke 16:26; Heb. 9:27) and the
immediate context. In this context, “those who are dead” are Christians to
whom “the gospel was preached” when they were alive but who have since
died. This fits with the meaning of “dead” in 1 Pet. 4:5. Believers will
experience physical death (that is, they are judged in the flesh the way
people are). But believers who have died live in the spirit the way God
does. That is, they live in heaven now, and they will live at the resurrection
when Christ returns.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:7 The end of all things is at hand does not mean
Peter expected Christ to return soon. It means all the major events in God’s
great salvation plan were completed in the death, resurrection, and
ascension of Christ and the outpouring of the Spirit at Pentecost. Therefore
Christ’s return could happen at any time.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:8–9 love covers a multitude of sins (Prov. 10:12).
Where love is present, offenses are forgiven. hospitality. See note on Heb.
13:2.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:10 All believers have received at least one spiritual
gift from God. They must use these gifts faithfully as stewards of God’s
grace (see 1 Corinthians 12–14).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:11 whoever speaks . . . whoever serves. Peter divides
spiritual gifts generally into speaking and serving gifts (for more detailed
lists, see Rom. 12:6–8; 1 Cor. 12:8–10, 28–30; and Eph. 4:11). Those who
speak must not teach their own ideas but faithfully declare God’s words
(oracles). Those who serve must not depend on their own strength but draw
their strength from God, so that God alone may be glorified through Jesus
Christ.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:12–5:11 Enduring Suffering. As the letter draws to a
close, Peter reminds his readers that they should not be surprised when they
suffer. God is using their suffering to purify the church. Therefore they
should give themselves to God completely in their sufferings (4:12–19).
Peter concludes with challenges to the leaders and the congregation to
continue in the faith. They can do so knowing their final reward is certain
(5:1–11).
FACT
The fiery trial. Peter warned his readers that they would soon endure a
“fiery trial” (4:12). In other words, they should expect persecution. He
probably wrote this letter not long before the Roman emperor Nero began
a campaign of persecution against Christians in Rome.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:12–13 Beloved marks the beginning of a new section
of the letter (compare 2:11). when his glory is revealed. When Christ
returns.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:14 To be insulted because one belongs to Christ is to
be blessed by God, because in such times the Spirit of glory, the Holy
Spirit, rests upon believers in an especially powerful way.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:17–18 In the OT, household of God (literally, “house
of God”) refers to the temple. Now God’s people are his temple (see 2:4–
10). “Judgment beginning with God’s house” echoes Ezek. 9:1–6 and Mal.
3:1–4, where the Lord purifies his people. Judgment here is not punishment.
It is purifying and cleansing. The suffering of God’s people makes them
stronger (1 Pet. 1:6–7). what will be the outcome? If God’s people need
purifying, then surely the judgment of those who do not obey the gospel
will be much more severe.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 4:19 This verse summarizes the message of 1 Peter.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:1 The most common NT term for church leaders is
elders (see notes on Acts 14:23; 1 Tim. 3:1). Apparently elders served as
leaders in all the churches. Peter, who is an apostle (1 Pet. 1:1), also serves
as a fellow elder and a witness of Christ’s ministry, especially his
sufferings. Peter often reminds his readers that suffering comes before
glory (compare 1:6–7, 11; 2:19–20; 3:13–14; 4:13; 5:6, 10).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:2–3 Elders (v. 1) must shepherd the flock (compare
John 21:16; Acts 20:28; Eph. 4:11). They must feed the people on God’s
word and care for their needs. They are also responsible for exercising
oversight in building up the church. They must do so willingly, in
obedience to God. They must serve eagerly, not for shameful gain
(money). They must avoid being domineering. The goal is to be good
examples to the flock.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:4 The chief Shepherd is Jesus Christ. When he comes
again he will reward with glory every pastor who has served faithfully.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:5 You who are younger probably means younger
members of the congregation. They are more likely to resist leadership.
Peter cites Prov. 3:34 (see James 4:6).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:6 Mighty hand of God brings to mind the exodus (Ex.
32:11; Deut. 5:15; Dan. 9:15).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:7 casting all your anxieties on him. Worry is a form
of pride. It takes concerns upon oneself instead of entrusting them to God,
who cares for his people.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:8 Satan prowls around . . . seeking someone to
devour. He hopes that believers will be terrified by hardship and
persecutions, or that they will be deceived and fall into sin.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:9 Resist him. Christians need not fear the devil. The
Lord has given them power to stand against him by being firm in your
faith (compare Eph. 6:12–18). Suffering happens to believers everywhere
(your brotherhood throughout the world).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:10 a little while (compare 1:6). This includes the
period of time from Christ’s ascension until his return. From God’s
perspective, one’s time in this world is brief (see James 4:14; 2 Pet. 3:8).
Four verbs (restore, confirm, strengthen, establish) remind believers that
their salvation is sure in Christ.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:12–14 Concluding Words. The letter concludes
with greetings and a final call to stand firm.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:12 By Silvanus . . . I have written. The sentence
structure indicates that Silvanus delivered the letter. Silvanus is called
“Silas” elsewhere (Acts 15:22; 16:19; 17:4; 2 Cor. 1:19; 1 Thess. 1:1). Peter
describes the content of his letter as the true grace of God.
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:13 She who is at Babylon, who is . . . chosen. The
Babylon of the OT was in ruins. By NT times “Babylon” symbolized a
center of earthly power opposed to God (see Isaiah 13–14; Jeremiah 50–51;
see also Revelation 17–18). In Peter’s day that city was Rome. The OT
background to “Babylon” reminds believers that they are “elect exiles” (1
Pet. 1:1) who will receive the promised inheritance. Mark is the same John
Mark who traveled with Paul and Barnabas on their first missionary journey
(see Acts 12:25; 13:5, 13; 15:36–39). Though he left Paul and Barnabas,
Mark became a fine minister (Col. 4:10; 2 Tim. 4:11; Philem. 24). Peter
would have known Mark for decades because the church met in his
mother’s home in Jerusalem (Acts 12:12). This verse also shows a close
relationship between Peter and Mark (my son).
1 PETER—NOTE ON 5:14 kiss of love. See notes on 1 Cor. 16:20; 2 Cor.
13:12–13. Peace. See 1 Pet. 1:2 and note on John 14:27.
FACT
A kiss of love (5:14) was simply a kiss on the cheek. It was usually
practiced among family members. Both Peter and Paul encouraged
believers to greet one another in this fashion because it reminded them
that they were brothers and sisters in Christ. Such a greeting is still
common in some parts of the world today.
2 Peter
(return to table of contents)
2 Peter 1 • 2 Peter 2 • 2 Peter 3
Introduction to 2 Peter
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose and Occasion
Key Themes
Outline
Global Message of 2 Peter
Second Peter and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in 2 Peter
The Global Message of 2 Peter for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to 2 Peter
Introduction to 2 Peter
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Peter identifies himself as an “apostle of Jesus Christ” (1:1). He specifically
mentions that he was an eyewitness of the transfiguration (1:16–18; see
Matt. 17:1–8). Peter probably wrote this letter from prison in Rome (see 2
Pet. 1:12–15) not too long before his death by execution, sometime during
A.D. 64–67. It is impossible to identify with certainty the churches Peter
addresses. He may have been writing to the churches of Asia Minor,
because Peter mentions that this is his second letter to these same people
(3:1; see 1 Pet. 1:1–2). (On the similarities between 2 Peter 2 and Jude, see
Introduction to Jude.)
Theme
God’s grace in Christ truly transforms and empowers Christians to live
righteously, despite opposition. This grace, introduced in 1:2–4, serves as
the foundation for the whole book. The indwelling Holy Spirit produces
virtuous qualities in followers of Christ (1:8–12). This results in fruitful
lives.
Purpose and Occasion
Peter writes his brief, final reminder to the churches so that his readers will,
by God’s grace, live in a way that is pleasing to God. In doing so, Peter
must also combat the false teachers who were apparently exerting pressure
on the churches to depart from the true knowledge of Christ (see esp. ch. 2).
The false teaching is not only a theological challenge but also a moral one,
promoting some form of sexual permissiveness as a legitimate Christian
lifestyle.
While the false teaching can be described based on what Peter writes, it
is historically impossible to identify who the false teachers were. For
example, there is no clear historical evidence that these teachers were
Gnostics.
Second Peter deals with serious issues, but it is also filled with famous
proverbs and wise sayings, as well as vivid poetry and imagery.
Key Themes
1. God, through his grace in Jesus Christ, has enabled Christians to
partake of the divine nature (1:2–4).
2. God’s grace results in godliness (1:5–15).
3. The revelation of truth in Christ and in Scripture is sure because it is
from God and not from man (1:16–21).
4. False teachers are handed over for destruction at the hand of God (2:1–
10).
5. False teachers are ethically bankrupt (2:11–22).
6. Believers must endure in the face of opposition, knowing that they are
living in the last days (3:1–13).
7. The Lord is patient with his creation, but someday he will suddenly
return to judge it (3:8–10).
8. God rescues the righteous (2:7–9; 3:13–18).
Outline
I. Initial Greeting (1:1–2)
II. God’s Grace in Christ Is the Source of Godly Living (1:3–11)
III. Peter’s Reminder to the Churches (1:12–21)
IV . Evaluation of False Teachers (2:1–22)
V . The Day of the Lord Will Surely Come (3:1–13)
VI. Concluding Encouragements (3:14–18)
The Global Message of 2 Peter
Peter writes his second letter to combat false teaching and to remind his
readers that the grace of God truly transforms sinners, enabling them to
walk in righteousness. For a contemporary world of moral chaos and false
teachings of various kinds, 2 Peter has forceful relevance.
Second Peter and Redemptive History
Peter does not quote the Old Testament to the degree that he did in his first
letter. Yet his second letter shows pervasive awareness of the history of
redemption that God has been orchestrating on behalf of his people down
through the ages.
Peter speaks, for example, of the Old Testament prophets and their hope
in the coming “day of the Lord” (2 Pet. 1:19–21; 3:1–13). He also refers
numerous times to the promises God has made (1:4; 3:4, 9, 13). More
specifically, the way Peter speaks of Christ throughout this letter makes
clear that he views Christ as the fulfillment of the Old Testament prophetic
hope and the divine promises. Peter speaks, for example, of the
transfiguration, where he saw with his own eyes “the power and coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ” (1:16). There God the Father spoke his blessing over
God the Son—his “beloved Son” (1:17). Peter is aware that his own life and
ministry come in the immediate wake of the high point of all of human
history: the coming of God’s Son into the world, for the sake of the world.
A particular emphasis in 2 Peter is the second coming of the Lord. Peter
seems to be dealing with those who mock the reality of Christ’s return to
earth in judgment. “They will say, ‘Where is the promise of his coming?’”
(2 Pet. 3:4). Peter explains that God is not delaying the end of history out of
reluctance or slowness, but rather out of patience, desiring all people
everywhere to be saved (3:9–10, 15). The great heart of God is “that all
should reach repentance” (3:9).
Universal Themes in 2 Peter
Transforming grace. Peter opens and closes this letter with the theme of
God’s transforming grace (2 Pet. 1:3–9; 3:18): “His divine power has
granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the
knowledge of him who called us to his own glory and excellence” (1:3).
After listing virtues that believers should cultivate in light of God’s great
promises, Peter reminds his readers that the absence of these virtues
indicates forgetfulness that one’s sins have been forgiven (1:9). As we
remember and enjoy forgiveness of sins, we develop godly virtues. We
“grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ”
(3:18). Wherever believers find themselves in their Christian development,
they never outgrow their dependence upon the grace of God.
The danger of false teaching. Our growth in godliness also means that we
develop an ever greater appreciation for true doctrine. Indeed, in describing
false teachers, Peter continually connects their error with the godlessness it
produces. This is seen especially in sexual immorality. In the opening
verses of chapter 2, for example, Peter says, “there will be false teachers
among you, who will secretly bring in destructive heresies” (2 Pet. 2:1),
then he goes on to say that “many will follow their sensuality” (2:2).
Teaching and conduct, word and deed, are naturally bound together. The
eternal truths of the Bible are to be cherished and guarded by all God’s
people in the church today, not simply for the sake of truth but for the sake
of their souls.
The Global Message of 2 Peter for Today
Peter’s second epistle engages the global church at a fundamental level.
Specific issues confronting the church and the world today—issues such as
racial reconciliation, human rights, the dignity of life, and conflict
resolution— are not addressed at an explicit level. And yet 2 Peter treats the
foundational issues that underlie current manifestations of human
sinfulness. Three such fundamental issues occur throughout 2 Peter: the
nature of godliness, the danger of false teaching, and the hope of Christ’s
second coming.
Godly living. Godliness in 2 Peter is described as something that requires
the utmost effort, the most strenuous and ardent devotion. Yet this epistle
also emphasizes that the cultivation of godliness is by divine grace. Peter
tells us to “make every effort” (2 Pet. 1:15), yet also that God’s “divine
power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness” (1:3).
The church today must ever seek to hold these two together—human effort
and divine provision, our work and God’s grace. For godly living is crucial
to the health of the church.
False teaching. Peter addresses false teaching head-on and rebukes it in
the most authoritative way possible. What is especially striking, as noted
above, is the way Peter connects false teaching to immorality. False
teaching does not simply encourage intellectual error; it also corrupts the
soul. This reminds the global church of the importance of sound doctrine. It
also reminds the church that sound doctrine is not an end in itself but is
important for the sake of godly living and the protection of the church’s
very life.
Christ’ s second coming. Finally, Christians take refuge in the sure hope
of Christ’s triumphant return. Upon his resurrection and ascension, Christ
took his seat at God’s right hand and even now reigns victoriously over evil,
death, hell, and Satan. Yet his righteous reign currently overlaps with “the
present evil age” (Gal. 1:4). One day, however, Christ will come again and
his triumph will be complete. On behalf of his people he will conquer once
and for all sickness and death, anguish and dismay, sin and temptation. As
the church today is embattled on countless fronts against the results of the
fall—including the sin we see within us—we press on in the sure hope that
Christ will come again to establish “new heavens and a new earth in which
righteousness dwells” (2 Pet. 3:13).
Greeting