1 SAMUEL 13 [†]Saul lived for one year and then became king, and when he
had reigned for two years over Israel, [1] 2[†]Saul chose three thousand men
of Israel. Two thousand were with Saul in k Michmash and the hill country
of Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in l Gibeah of Benjamin. The
rest of the people he sent home, every man to his tent. 3Jonathan defeated
m the garrison of the Philistines that was n at Geba, and the Philistines heard
of it. And Saul o blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, “Let the
Hebrews hear.” 4And all Israel heard it said that Saul had defeated the
garrison of the Philistines, and also that Israel had become a stench to the
Philistines. And the people were called out to join Saul at Gilgal.
5[†]And the Philistines mustered to fight with Israel, thirty thousand
chariots and six thousand horsemen and troops p like the sand on the
seashore in multitude. They came up and encamped in Michmash, to the
east of q Beth-aven. 6When the men of Israel saw that they were in trouble
(for the people were hard pressed), the people hid themselves r in caves and
in holes and in rocks and in tombs and in cisterns, 7[†]and some Hebrews
crossed the fords of the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. Saul was still
at Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.
Saul’s Unlawful Sacrifice
8[†] s He waited seven days, the time appointed by Samuel. But Samuel did
not come to Gilgal, and the people were scattering from him. 9So Saul said,
“Bring the burnt offering here to me, and the peace offerings.” And he
offered the burnt offering. 10As soon as he had finished offering the burnt
offering, behold, Samuel came. And Saul went out to meet him and greet
him. 11Samuel said, “What have you done?” And Saul said, “When I saw
that the people were scattering from me, and that you did not come within
the days appointed, and that the Philistines had mustered at Michmash, 12I
said, ‘Now the Philistines will come down against me at Gilgal, and I have
not sought the favor of the LORD.’ So I forced myself, and offered the burnt
offering.” 13[†]And Samuel said to Saul, t “You have done foolishly. u You
have not kept the command of the LORD your God, with which he
commanded you. For then the LORD would have established your kingdom
over Israel forever.
14But now v your kingdom shall not continue. The LORD
has sought out a man w after his own heart, and the LORD has commanded
him to be prince [2] over his people, because you have not kept what the
LORD commanded you.” 15And Samuel arose and went up from Gilgal. The
rest of the people went up after Saul to meet the army; they went up from
Gilgal [3] to x Gibeah of Benjamin.
And Saul numbered the people who were present with him, y about six
hundred men. 16[†]And Saul and Jonathan his son and the people who were
present with them stayed in z Geba of Benjamin, but the Philistines
encamped in Michmash. 17And a raiders came out of the camp of the
Philistines in three companies. One company turned toward Ophrah, to the
land of Shual; 18another company turned toward b Beth-horon; and another
company turned toward the border that looks down on the Valley of
c Zeboim toward the wilderness.
19[†] d Now there was no blacksmith to be found throughout all the land
of Israel, for the Philistines said, “Lest the Hebrews make themselves
swords or spears.” 20But every one of the Israelites went down to the
Philistines to sharpen his plowshare, his mattock, his axe, or his sickle, [4]
21and the charge was two-thirds of a shekel [5] for the plowshares and for
the mattocks, and a third of a shekel [6] for sharpening the axes and for
setting the goads. [7] 22So on the day of the battle e there was neither sword
nor spear found in the hand of any of the people with Saul and Jonathan,
but Saul and Jonathan his son had them. 23And f the garrison of the
Philistines went out to the g pass of h Michmash.
Jonathan Defeats the Philistines