1 SAMUEL 11 [†] o Then Nahash the Ammonite went up and besieged
p Jabesh-gilead, and all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, q “Make a treaty
with us, and we will serve you.” 2[†]But Nahash the Ammonite said to
them, “On this condition I will make a treaty with you, r that I gouge out all
your right eyes, and thus s bring disgrace on all Israel.” 3[†]The elders of
Jabesh said to him, “Give us seven days’ respite that we may send
messengers through all the territory of Israel. Then, if there is no one to
save us, we will give ourselves up to you.” 4[†]When the messengers came
to t Gibeah of Saul, they reported the matter in the ears of the people, u and
all the people wept aloud.
5Now, behold, Saul was coming from the field behind the oxen. And Saul
said, “What is wrong with the people, that they are weeping?” So they told
him the news of the men of Jabesh. 6[†] v And the Spirit of God rushed upon
Saul when he heard these words, and his anger was greatly kindled. 7He
took a yoke of oxen w and cut them in pieces and sent them throughout all
the territory of Israel by the hand of the messengers, saying, x “Whoever
does not come out after Saul and Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen!”
Then the dread of the LORD fell upon the people, and they came out y as one
man. 8[†]When he mustered them at z Bezek, a the people of Israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand. 9And they
said to the messengers who had come, “Thus shall you say to the men of
Jabesh-gilead: ‘Tomorrow, by the time the sun is hot, you shall have
b salvation.’” When the messengers came and told the men of Jabesh, they
were glad. 10[†]Therefore the men of Jabesh said, c “Tomorrow we will
give ourselves up to you, and you may do to us whatever seems good to
you.” 11
d And the next day Saul put the people e in three companies. And
they came into the midst of the camp in the morning watch and struck down
the Ammonites until the heat of the day. And those who survived were
scattered, so that no two of them were left together.
The Kingdom Is Renewed
12[†]Then the people said to Samuel, f “Who is it that said, ‘Shall Saul reign
over us?’ g Bring the men, that we may put them to death.” 13But Saul said,
h “Not a man shall be put to death this day, for today i the LORD has worked
j salvation in Israel.” 14Then Samuel said to the people, “Come, let us go to
Gilgal and there renew the kingdom.” 15So all the people went to k Gilgal,
and there they made Saul king l before the LORD in Gilgal. There m they
sacrificed peace offerings before the LORD, and there Saul and all the men
of Israel rejoiced greatly.
Samuel’s Farewell Address