1 SAMUEL 27 [†]Then David said in his heart, “Now I shall perish one day
by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than that I should escape
to the land of the Philistines. Then Saul will despair of seeking me any
longer within the borders of Israel, and I shall escape out of his hand.” 2So
David arose and went over, he and u the six hundred men who were with
him, v to Achish the son of Maoch, king of Gath. 3And David lived with
Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, and David
with w his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail of Carmel, Nabal’s
widow.
4And when it was told Saul that David had fled to Gath, he no
longer sought him.
5[†]Then David said to Achish, “If x I have found favor in your eyes, let a
place be given me in one of the country towns, that I may dwell there. For
why should your servant dwell in the royal city with you?” 6[†]So that day
Achish gave him y Ziklag. Therefore Ziklag has belonged to the kings of
Judah to this day.
7 z And the number of the days that David lived in the
country of the Philistines was a year and four months.
8[†]Now David a and his men went up and made raids against b the
Geshurites, c the Girzites, and d the Amalekites, for these were the
inhabitants of the land from of old, e as far as Shur, to the land of Egypt.
9And David would strike the land and would leave neither man nor woman
alive, but would take away the sheep, the oxen, the donkeys, the camels,
and the garments, and come back to Achish. 10[†]When Achish asked,
“Where have you f made a raid today?” David would say, “Against the
Negeb of Judah,” or, “Against the Negeb of g the Jerahmeelites,” or,
“Against the Negeb of h the Kenites.” 11And David would leave neither
man nor woman alive to bring news to Gath, thinking, “lest they should tell
about us and say, ‘So David has done.’” Such was his custom all the while
he lived in the country of the Philistines. 12And Achish trusted David,
thinking, “He has made himself an utter stench to his people Israel;
therefore he shall always be my servant.”
Saul and the Medium of En-dor