1 SAMUEL 29 [†] d Now the Philistines had gathered all their forces at
e Aphek. And the Israelites were encamped by f the spring that is in
g Jezreel. 2As h the lords of the Philistines were passing on by hundreds and
by thousands, and David and his men were passing on in the rear i with
Achish, 3the commanders of the Philistines said, “What are these Hebrews
doing here?” And Achish said to the commanders of the Philistines, “Is this
not David, the servant of Saul, king of Israel, who has been with me j now
for days and years, and since he deserted to me k I have found no fault in
him to this day.” 4[†]But h the commanders of the Philistines were angry
with him. And the commanders of the Philistines said to him, “Send the
man back, that he may return l to the place to which you have assigned him.
He shall not go down with us to battle, m lest in the battle he become an
adversary to us. For how could this fellow reconcile himself to his lord?
Would it not be with the heads of the men here? 5Is not this David, of whom
they sing to one another in dances,
n ‘Saul has struck down his thousands,
and David his ten thousands’?”
6[†]Then Achish called David and said to him, o “As the LORD lives, you
have been honest, and to me it seems right that p you should march out and
in with me in the campaign. For I have found nothing wrong in you from
the day of your coming to me to this day. Nevertheless, the lords do not
approve of you. 7So go back now; and go peaceably, that you may not
displease the lords of the Philistines.” 8[†]And David said to Achish, “But
what have I done? What have you found in your servant from the day I
entered your service until now, that I may not go and fight against the
enemies of my lord the king?” 9And Achish answered David and said, “I
know that you are as blameless in my sight q as an angel of God.
Nevertheless, r the commanders of the Philistines have said, ‘He shall not
go up with us to the battle.’ 10Now then rise early in the morning s with the
servants of your lord who came with you, and start early in the morning,
and depart as soon as you have light.” 11[†]So David set out with his men
early in the morning to return to the land of the Philistines. But the
Philistines went up to t Jezreel.
David’s Wives Are Captured