1 SAMUEL 10 [†] c Then Samuel took a flask of oil and poured it on his head
d and kissed him and said, “Has not the LORD anointed you to be prince [1]
over e his people Israel? And you shall reign over the people of the LORD
and you will save them from the hand of their surrounding enemies. And
this shall be the sign to you that the LORD has anointed you to be prince [2]
over his heritage. 2When you depart from me today, you will meet two men
by f Rachel’s tomb in the territory of Benjamin at Zelzah, and they will say
to you, g ‘The donkeys that you went to seek are found, and now h your
father has ceased to care about the donkeys and is anxious about you,
saying, “What shall I do about my son?”’ 3Then you shall go on from there
farther and come to the i oak of Tabor. Three men j going up k to God at
Bethel will meet you there, one carrying three young goats, another
carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a skin of wine. 4[†]And
they will greet you and give you two loaves of bread, which you shall
accept from their hand. 5After that you shall come to l Gibeath-elohim, [3]
m where there is a garrison of the Philistines. And there, as soon as you
come to the city, you will meet a group of prophets coming down n from the
high place with harp, tambourine, flute, and lyre before them, prophesying.
6[†] o Then the Spirit of the LORD will rush upon you, p and you will
prophesy with them and be turned into another man. 7Now when q these
signs meet you, do what your hand finds to do, r for God is with you. 8Then
go down before me s to Gilgal. And behold, I am coming down to you to
offer burnt offerings and t to sacrifice peace offerings. u Seven days you
shall wait, until I come to you and show you what you shall do.”
9[†]When he turned his back to leave Samuel, God gave him another
heart. And all these signs came to pass that day.
10When they came to
v Gibeah, [4] behold, a group of prophets met him, o and the Spirit of God
rushed upon him, and he prophesied among them. 11[†]And when all who
knew him previously saw how he prophesied with the prophets, the people
said to one another, “What has come over the son of Kish? w Is Saul also
among the prophets?” 12[†]And a man of the place answered, x “And who is
their father?” Therefore it became a proverb, w “Is Saul also among the
prophets?” 13When he had finished prophesying, he came to the high place.
14[†] y Saul’s uncle said to him and to his servant, “Where did you go?”
And he said, z “To seek the donkeys. And when we saw they were not to be
found, we went to Samuel.” 15And Saul’s uncle said, “Please tell me what
Samuel said to you.” 16And Saul said to his uncle, a “He told us plainly that
the donkeys had been found.” But about the matter of the kingdom, of
which Samuel had spoken, he did not tell him anything.
Saul Proclaimed King
17Now Samuel called the people together b to the LORD c at Mizpah. 18And
he said to the people of Israel, d “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, ‘I
brought up Israel out of Egypt, and I delivered you from the hand of the
Egyptians and from the hand of all the kingdoms that were oppressing you.’
19
e But today you have rejected your God, who saves you from all your
calamities and your distresses, and you have said to him, ‘Set a king over
us.’ Now therefore f present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes and
by your thousands.”
20Then Samuel g brought all the tribes of Israel near, and the tribe of
Benjamin was taken by lot. 21He brought the tribe of Benjamin near by its
clans, and the clan of the Matrites was taken by lot; [5] and Saul the son of
Kish was taken by lot. But when they sought him, he could not be found.
22[†] h So they inquired again of the LORD, “Is there a man still to come?”
and the LORD said, “Behold, he has hidden himself among the baggage.”
23Then they ran and took him from there. And when he stood among the
people, i he was taller than any of the people from his shoulders upward.
24[†]And Samuel said to all the people, “Do you see him j whom the LORD
has chosen? There is none like him among all the people.” And all the
people shouted, k “Long live the king!”
25[†]Then Samuel told the people l the rights and duties of the kingship,
and he wrote them in a book and laid it up before the LORD. Then Samuel
sent all the people away, each one to his home. 26[†]Saul also went to his
home m at Gibeah, and with him went men of valor whose hearts God had
touched. 27But some n worthless fellows said, “How can this man save us?”
And they despised him and brought him no present. But he held his peace.
Saul Defeats the Ammonites