1 SAMUEL 14 [†]One day Jonathan the son of Saul said to the young man
who carried his armor, “Come, let us go over to the Philistine garrison on
the other side.” But he did not tell his father.
2[†]Saul was staying in the
outskirts of Gibeah in the pomegranate cave [1] at h Migron. The people
who were with him were about i six hundred men, 3including j Ahijah the
son of Ahitub, k Ichabod’s brother, son of Phinehas, son of Eli, the priest of
the LORD l in Shiloh, m wearing an ephod. And the people did not know that
Jonathan had gone. 4[†]Within n the passes, by which Jonathan sought to go
over to the Philistine garrison, there was a rocky crag on the one side and a
rocky crag on the other side. The name of the one was Bozez, and the name
of the other Seneh. 5The one crag rose on the north in front of Michmash,
and the other on the south in front of o Geba.
6[†]Jonathan said to the young man who carried his armor, “Come, let us
go over to the garrison of these p uncircumcised. It may be that the LORD
will work for us, q for nothing can hinder the LORD from saving by many or
by few.” 7And his armor-bearer said to him, “Do all that is in your heart. Do
as you wish. [2] Behold, I am with you heart and soul.” 8Then Jonathan said,
“Behold, we will cross over to the men, and we will show ourselves to
them. 9If they say to us, ‘Wait until we come to you,’ then we will stand still
in our place, and we will not go up to them. 10[†]But if they say, ‘Come up
to us,’ then we will go up, for the LORD has given them into our hand. And
this shall be the sign to us.” 11So both of them showed themselves to the
garrison of the Philistines. And the Philistines said, “Look, Hebrews are
coming r out of the holes where they have hidden themselves.” 12And the
men of the garrison hailed Jonathan and his armor-bearer and said, “Come
up to us, and we will show you a thing.” And Jonathan said to his armor-
bearer, “Come up after me, for the LORD has given them into the hand of
Israel.” 13Then Jonathan climbed up on his hands and feet, and his armor-
bearer after him. And they fell before Jonathan, and his armor-bearer killed
them after him. 14[†]And that first strike, which Jonathan and his armor-
bearer made, killed about twenty men within as it were half a furrow’s
length in an acre [3] of land. 15[†]And there was a panic in the camp, in the
field, and among all the people. The garrison and even s the raiders
trembled, the earth quaked, and it became a very great panic. [4]
16[†]And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked, and
behold, the multitude t was dispersing here and there. [5] 17Then Saul said to
the people who were with him, “Count and see who has gone from us.” And
when they had counted, behold, Jonathan and his armor-bearer were not
there. 18[†]So Saul said to Ahijah, “Bring the ark of God here.” For the ark
of God went at that time with the people [6] of Israel. 19Now u while Saul
was talking to the priest, the tumult in the camp of the Philistines increased
more and more. So Saul said to the priest, “Withdraw your hand.” 20Then
Saul and all the people who were with him rallied and went into the battle.
And behold, v every Philistine’s sword was against his fellow, and there was
very great confusion. 21[†]Now the Hebrews who had been with the
Philistines before that time and who had gone up with them into the camp,
w even they also turned to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and
Jonathan. 22Likewise, when all the men of Israel x who had hidden
themselves y in the hill country of Ephraim heard that the Philistines were
fleeing, they too followed hard after them in the battle. 23[†] z So the LORD
saved Israel that day. And the battle passed beyond a Beth-aven.
Saul’s Rash Vow
24[†]And the men of Israel had been hard pressed that day, b so Saul had
laid an oath on the people, saying, “Cursed be the man who eats food until
it is evening and I am avenged on my enemies.” So none of the people had
tasted food. 25Now when all the people [7] came to the forest, behold, there
was honey on the ground. 26And when the people entered the forest, behold,
the honey was dropping, but no one put his hand to his mouth, for the
people feared the oath. 27[†]But Jonathan had not heard his father charge
the people with the oath, c so he put out the tip of the staff that was in his
hand and dipped it in the honeycomb and put his hand to his mouth, and his
eyes became bright. 28[†]Then one of the people said, “Your father strictly
charged the people with an oath, saying, ‘Cursed be the man who eats food
this day.’” And the people were d faint. 29Then Jonathan said, “My father
has troubled the land. See how my eyes have become bright because I
tasted a little of this honey.
30How much better if the people had eaten
freely today of the spoil of their enemies that they found. For now the
defeat among the Philistines has not been great.”
31They struck down the Philistines that day from e Michmash to
f Aijalon. And the people were very d faint. 32[†]The people g pounced on
the spoil and took sheep and oxen and calves and slaughtered them on the
ground. And the people ate them h with the blood. 33Then they told Saul,
“Behold, the people are sinning against the LORD by eating h with the
blood.” And he said, “You have dealt treacherously; roll a great stone to me
here.” [8] 34And Saul said, “Disperse yourselves among the people and say
to them, ‘Let every man bring his ox or his sheep and slaughter them here
and eat, and do not sin against the LORD by eating with the blood.’” So
every one of the people brought his ox with him that night and they
slaughtered them there. 35And Saul i built an altar to the LORD; it was the
first altar that he built to the LORD.
36Then Saul said, “Let us go down after the Philistines by night and
plunder them until the morning light; let us not leave a man of them.” And
they said, “Do whatever seems good to you.” But j the priest said, “Let us
draw near to God here.” 37And Saul inquired of God, “Shall I go down after
the Philistines? Will you give them into the hand of Israel?” k But he did not
answer him that day.
38And Saul said, “Come here, all you leaders of the
people, and know and see how this sin has arisen today.
39[†]For l as the
LORD lives who saves Israel, m though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall
surely die.” But there was not a man among all the people who answered
him. 40Then he said to all Israel, “You shall be on one side, and I and
Jonathan my son will be on the other side.” And the people said to Saul,
“Do what seems good to you.” 41[†]Therefore Saul said, “O LORD God of
Israel, why have you not answered your servant this day? If this guilt is in
me or in Jonathan my son, O LORD, God of Israel, give Urim. But if this
guilt is in your people Israel, give Thummim.” [9] n And Jonathan and Saul
were taken, but the people escaped. 42Then Saul said, n “Cast the lot
between me and my son Jonathan.” And Jonathan was taken.
43Then Saul said to Jonathan, o “Tell me what you have done.” And
Jonathan told him, p “I tasted a little honey with the tip of the staff that was
in my hand. Here I am; I will die.” 44And Saul said, q “God do so to me and
more also; r you shall surely die, Jonathan.” 45[†]Then the people said to
Saul, “Shall Jonathan die, who has worked this great salvation in Israel? Far
from it! l As the LORD lives, s there shall not one hair of his head fall to the
ground, for he has worked with God this day.” So the people ransomed
Jonathan, so that he did not die. 46Then Saul went up from pursuing the
Philistines, and the Philistines went to their own place.
Saul Fights Israel’s Enemies
47When Saul had taken the kingship over Israel, he fought against all his
enemies on every side, against Moab, t against the Ammonites, against
Edom, against the kings of u Zobah, and against the Philistines. Wherever
he turned he routed them. 48And he did valiantly v and struck the
Amalekites and delivered Israel out of the hands of those who plundered
them.
49[†] w Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, Ishvi, and Malchi-shua. And
the names of his two daughters were these: the name of the firstborn was
x Merab, and the name of the younger Michal. 50[†]And the name of Saul’s
wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz. y And the name of the
commander of his army was Abner the son of Ner, z Saul’s uncle. 51
a Kish
was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of a Abiel.
52There was hard fighting against the Philistines all the days of Saul. And
when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, b he attached him to
himself.
The LORD Rejects Saul