1 SAMUEL 12 [†]And Samuel said to all Israel, “Behold, I have obeyed
n your voice in all that you have said to me o and have made a king over
you. 2And now, behold, the king p walks before you, q and I am old and
gray; and behold, my sons are with you. I have walked before you from my
youth until this day.
3[†]Here I am; testify against me before the LORD and
before r his anointed. s Whose ox have I taken? Or whose donkey have I
taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Or from
whose hand have I taken a bribe to blind my eyes with it? Testify against
me [1] and I will restore it to you.” 4They said, “You have not defrauded us
or oppressed us or taken anything from any man’s hand.” 5And he said to
them, “The LORD is witness against you, and r his anointed is witness this
day, that you have not found anything t in my hand.” And they said, “He is
witness.”
6And Samuel said to the people, u “The LORD is witness, [2] who
appointed Moses and Aaron and brought your fathers up out of the land of
Egypt. 7Now therefore stand still that I may plead with you before the LORD
concerning all the righteous deeds of the LORD that he performed for you
and for your fathers. 8 v When Jacob went into Egypt, and the Egyptians
oppressed them, [3] w then your fathers cried out to the LORD and x the LORD
sent Moses and Aaron, y who brought your fathers out of Egypt and made
them dwell in this place. 9But z they forgot the LORD their God. a And he
sold them into the hand of Sisera, commander of the army of Hazor, [4]
b and into the hand of the Philistines, c and into the hand of the king of
Moab. And they fought against them. 10[†] d And they cried out to the LORD
and said, ‘We have sinned, because we have forsaken the LORD e and have
served the Baals and the Ashtaroth. But now f deliver us out of the hand of
our enemies, that we may serve you.’ 11And the LORD sent g Jerubbaal h and
Barak [5] i and Jephthah and j Samuel and delivered you out of the hand of
your enemies on every side, and you lived in safety.
12And when you saw
that k Nahash the king of the Ammonites came against you, l you said to
me, ‘No, but a king shall reign over us,’ m when the LORD your God was
your king. 13And now n behold the king whom you have chosen, for whom
you have asked; behold, o the LORD has set a king over you. 14[†]If you will
p fear the LORD and serve him and obey his voice and not rebel against the
commandment of the LORD, and if both you and the king who reigns over
you will follow the LORD your God, it will be well. 15But q if you will not
obey the voice of the LORD, but rebel against the commandment of the
LORD, then r the hand of the LORD will be against you and s your king. [6]
16Now therefore t stand still and see this great thing that the LORD will do
before your eyes. 17 u Is it not wheat harvest today? v I will call upon the
LORD, that he may send thunder and rain. And you shall know and see that
w your wickedness is great, which you have done in the sight of the LORD,
in asking for yourselves a king.” 18So Samuel called upon the LORD, and the
LORD sent thunder and rain that day, x and all the people greatly feared the
LORD and Samuel.
19And all the people said to Samuel, y “Pray for your servants to the
LORD your God, that we may not die, for we have added to all our sins this
evil, to ask for ourselves a king.” 20And Samuel said to the people, “Do not
be afraid; you have done all this evil. Yet z do not turn aside from following
the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart. 21[†]And z do not turn
aside after a empty things that cannot profit or deliver, for they are empty.
22 b For the LORD will not forsake his people, c for his great name’s sake,
because d it has pleased the LORD to make you a people for himself.
23[†]Moreover, as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against the
LORD by ceasing e to pray for you, f and I will instruct you in the good and
the right way.
24
g Only fear the LORD and serve him faithfully with all your
heart. For consider h what great things he has done for you. 25[†]But if you
still do wickedly, i you shall be swept away, j both you and your king.”
Saul Fights the Philistines