1 SAMUEL 16 [†]The LORD said to Samuel, r “How long will you grieve
over Saul, since s I have rejected him from being king over Israel? t Fill
your horn with oil, and go. I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite, u for I
have provided for myself a king among his sons.” 2[†]And Samuel said,
“How can I go? If Saul hears it, he will kill me.” And the LORD said, “Take
a heifer with you and say, v ‘I have come to sacrifice to the LORD.’ 3And
invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show you what you shall do. w And
you shall anoint for me him whom I declare to you.” 4Samuel did what the
LORD commanded and came to Bethlehem. The elders of the city x came to
meet him trembling and said, y “Do you come peaceably?” 5[†]And he said,
“Peaceably; I have come to sacrifice to the LORD. z Consecrate yourselves,
and come with me to the sacrifice.” And he consecrated Jesse and his sons
and invited them to the sacrifice.
6When they came, he looked on a Eliab and thought, “Surely the LORD’s
anointed is before him.” 7[†]But the LORD said to Samuel, b “Do not look
on his appearance or on the height of his stature, because I have rejected
him. For the LORD sees not as man sees: man looks on the outward
appearance, c but the LORD looks on the heart.” 8[†]Then Jesse called
d Abinadab and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, “Neither has
the LORD chosen this one.” 9Then Jesse made d Shammah pass by. And he
said, “Neither has the LORD chosen this one.” 10[†]And Jesse made seven of
his sons pass before Samuel. And Samuel said to Jesse, “The LORD has not
chosen these.” 11Then Samuel said to Jesse, “Are all your sons here?” And
he said, e “There remains yet the youngest, [1] but behold, he is keeping the
sheep.” And Samuel said to Jesse, f “Send and get him, for we will not sit
down till he comes here.” 12And he sent and brought him in. Now he was
g ruddy and had beautiful eyes and was handsome. And the LORD said,
h “Arise, anoint him, for this is he.” 13[†]Then Samuel took i the horn of oil
j and anointed him in the midst of his brothers. k And the Spirit of the LORD
rushed upon David from that day forward. And Samuel rose up and went to
Ramah.
David in Saul’s Service
14[†] l Now the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, m and a harmful spirit
from the LORD tormented him. 15And Saul’s servants said to him, “Behold
now, a harmful spirit from God is tormenting you. 16[†]Let our lord now
command your servants n who are before you to seek out a man who is
skillful in playing the lyre, and when the harmful spirit from God is upon
you, he will o play it, and you will be well.” 17So Saul said to his servants,
“Provide for me a man who can play well and bring him to me.” 18One of
the young men answered, “Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the
Bethlehemite, who is skillful in playing, p a man of valor, a man of war,
prudent in speech, and a man of good presence, q and the LORD is with
him.” 19Therefore Saul sent messengers to Jesse and said, “Send me David
your son, r who is with the sheep.” 20 s And Jesse took a donkey laden with
bread and a skin of wine and a young goat and sent them by David his son
to Saul. 21[†]And David came to Saul t and entered his service. And Saul
loved him greatly, and he became his armor-bearer.
22[†]And Saul sent to
Jesse, saying, “Let David remain in my service, for he has found favor in
my sight.” 23And u whenever the harmful spirit from God was upon Saul,
David took the lyre o and played it with his hand. So Saul was refreshed and
was well, and the harmful spirit departed from him.
David and Goliath