1 SAMUEL 26 [†] t Then the Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah, saying, “Is not
David hiding himself on the hill of Hachilah, which is on the east of
Jeshimon?” 2So Saul arose and went down to u the wilderness of Ziph with
v three thousand chosen men of Israel to seek David in the wilderness of
Ziph. 3And Saul encamped on the hill of Hachilah, which is beside the road
on the east of Jeshimon. But David remained in the wilderness. When he
saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness, 4David sent out spies and
learned that Saul had indeed come. 5Then David rose and came to the place
where Saul had encamped. And David saw the place where Saul lay, with
w Abner the son of Ner, the commander of his army. Saul was lying within
x the encampment, while the army was encamped around him.
6[†]Then David said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Joab’s brother
y Abishai the son of Zeruiah, z “Who will go down with me into the camp to
Saul?” And Abishai said, “I will go down with you.” 7So David and Abishai
went to the army by night. And there lay Saul sleeping within x the
encampment, with his spear stuck in the ground a at his head, and Abner
and the army lay around him. 8Then Abishai said to David, b “God has
given your enemy into your hand this day. Now please let me pin him to the
earth with one stroke of the spear, and I will not strike him twice.” 9But
David said to Abishai, “Do not destroy him, for who can put out his hand
c against the LORD’s anointed and be guiltless?” 10And David said, d “As
the LORD lives, e the LORD will strike him, or f his day will come to die, g or
he will go down into battle and perish. 11[†] h The LORD forbid that I should
put out my hand against the LORD’s anointed. But take now the spear that is
i at his head and the jar of water, and let us go.” 12So David took the spear
and the jar of water from Saul’s head, and they went away. No man saw it
or knew it, nor did any awake, for they were all asleep, because j a deep
sleep from the LORD had fallen upon them.
13Then David went over to the other side and stood far off on the top of
the hill, with a great space between them. 14And David called to the army,
and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, “Will you not answer, Abner?” Then
Abner answered, “Who are you who calls to the king?” 15And David said to
Abner, “Are you not a man? Who is like you in Israel? Why then have you
not kept watch over your lord the king? For one of the people came in to
destroy the king your lord. 16[†]This thing that you have done is not good.
k As the LORD lives, you deserve to die, because you have not kept watch
over your lord, the LORD’s anointed. And now see where the king’s spear is
and the jar of water that was l at his head.”
17Saul recognized David’s voice and said, m “Is this your voice, my son
David?” And David said, “It is my voice, my lord, O king.” 18And he said,
n “Why does my lord pursue after his servant? For what have I done? What
evil is on my hands? 19[†]Now therefore let my lord the king hear the words
of his servant. If it is the LORD who has stirred you up against me, may he
accept an offering, but if it is men, may they be cursed before the LORD,
o for they have driven me out this day that I should have no share in p the
heritage of the LORD, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods.’ 20Now therefore, let
not my blood fall to the earth away from the presence of the LORD, for the
king of Israel has come out to seek q a single flea like one who hunts a
partridge in the mountains.”
21Then Saul said, r “I have sinned. Return, my son David, for I will no
more do you harm, because my life was precious in your eyes this day.
Behold, I have acted foolishly, and have made a great mistake.” 22And
David answered and said, “Here is the spear, O king! Let one of the young
men come over and take it. 23 s The LORD rewards every man for his
righteousness and his faithfulness, for the LORD gave you into my hand
today, and I would not put out my hand against the LORD’s anointed.
24Behold, as your life was precious this day in my sight, so may my life be
precious in the sight of the LORD, and may he deliver me out of all
tribulation.” 25Then Saul said to David, “Blessed be you, my son David!
You will do many things and will t succeed in them.” So David went his
way, and Saul returned to his place.
David Flees to the Philistines