2 CHRONICLES 34 [†] m Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem. 2[†]And he did what was right
in the eyes of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father; and he
did not turn aside to the right hand or to the left. 3[†]For in the eighth year
of his reign, while he was yet a boy, he began to seek the God of David his
father, and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem of the
high places, the n Asherim, and the carved and the metal images. 4And they
chopped down the altars of the Baals in his presence, and he cut down the
o incense altars that stood above them. And he broke in pieces the
n Asherim and the carved and the metal images, and he made dust of them
and o scattered it over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them. 5 p He
also burned the bones of the priests on their altars and cleansed Judah and
Jerusalem. 6And in the q cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, and Simeon, and as
far as Naphtali, in their ruins [1] all around, 7he broke down the altars and
beat the n Asherim and the images r into powder and cut down all the
incense altars throughout all the land of Israel. Then he returned to
Jerusalem.
The Book of the Law Found
8[†] s Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had cleansed the land
and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the
t governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz, u the recorder, to repair
the house of the LORD his God. 9They came to v Hilkiah the high priest and
gave him the money that had been brought into the house of God, which the
Levites, the keepers of the threshold, had collected from q Manasseh and
Ephraim and from all the remnant of Israel and from all Judah and
Benjamin and from the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 10And they gave it to the
workmen who were working in the house of the LORD. And the workmen
who were working in the house of the LORD gave it for repairing and
restoring the house. 11They gave it to the carpenters and the builders to buy
quarried stone, and timber for binders and w beams for the buildings that the
kings of Judah had let go to ruin. 12And the men did the work faithfully.
Over them were set Jahath and Obadiah the Levites, of the sons of Merari,
and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to have
oversight. x The Levites, all who were skillful with instruments of music,
13were over y the burden-bearers and directed all who did work in every
kind of service, and some of the Levites were scribes and officials and
gatekeepers.
14[†]While they were bringing out the money that had been brought into
the house of the LORD, v Hilkiah the priest found the Book of the Law of the
LORD given through Moses. 15Then Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan
the secretary, “I have found the Book of the Law in the house of the LORD.”
And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan. 16Shaphan brought the book to the
king, and further reported to the king, “All that was committed to your
servants they are doing. 17They have emptied out the money that was found
in the house of the LORD and have given it into the hand of the overseers
and the workmen.” 18Then Shaphan the secretary told the king, “Hilkiah the
priest has given me a book.” And Shaphan read from it before the king.
19[†]And when the king heard the words of the Law, z he tore his clothes.
20And the king commanded Hilkiah, Ahikam the son of Shaphan, Abdon
the son of Micah, Shaphan the secretary, and Asaiah the king’s servant,
saying, 21“Go, inquire of the LORD for me and for those who are left in
Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that has been found.
For great is a the wrath of the LORD that is poured out on us, because our
fathers have not kept the word of the LORD, to do according to all that is
written in this book.”
Huldah Prophesies Disaster
22[†]So Hilkiah and those whom the king had sent [2] went to Huldah the
prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tokhath, son of Hasrah, keeper
of the wardrobe (now she lived in Jerusalem in the Second Quarter) and
spoke to her to that effect. 23And she said to them, “Thus says the LORD, the
God of Israel: ‘Tell the man who sent you to me, 24Thus says the LORD,
Behold, I will bring disaster upon this place and upon its inhabitants, all the
curses that are written in the book that was read before the king of Judah.
25Because they have forsaken me and b have made offerings to other gods,
that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands,
therefore a my wrath will be poured out on this place and will not be
quenched. 26But to the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the LORD,
thus shall you say to him, Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Regarding
the words that you have heard, 27[†]because your heart was tender and you
humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this place
and its inhabitants, and you have humbled yourself before me and have torn
your clothes and wept before me, I also have heard you, declares the LORD.
28[†]Behold, I will gather you to your fathers, and you shall be gathered to
your grave in peace, and your eyes shall not see all the disaster that I will
bring upon this place and its inhabitants.’” And they brought back word to
the king.
29 c Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and
Jerusalem. 30[†]And the king went up to the house of the LORD, with all the
men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem and the priests and the
Levites, all the people both great and small. And he read in their hearing all
the words of the Book of the Covenant that had been found in the house of
the LORD.
31And the king d stood in his place e and made a covenant before
the LORD, to walk after the LORD and to keep his commandments and his
testimonies and his statutes, with all his heart and all his soul, to perform
the words of the covenant that were written in this book. 32[†]Then he made
all who were present in Jerusalem and in Benjamin join in it. And the
inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of
their fathers. 33And Josiah took away f all the abominations from all the
territory that belonged to the people of Israel and made all who were
present in Israel serve the LORD their God. All his days they did not turn
away from following the LORD, the God of their fathers.
Josiah Keeps the Passover