2 CHRONICLES 13 [†] z In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, y Abijah
began to reign over Judah. 2[†]He reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His
mother’s name was a Micaiah [1] the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah.
b Now there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam. 3[†]Abijah went out
to battle, having an army of valiant men of war, 400,000 chosen men. And
Jeroboam c drew up his line of battle against him with 800,000 chosen
mighty warriors. 4[†]Then Abijah stood up on Mount d Zemaraim that is in
e the hill country of Ephraim and said, “Hear me, O Jeroboam and all Israel!
5[†]Ought you not to know that the LORD God of Israel f gave the kingship
over Israel forever to David and his sons by g a covenant of salt? 6Yet
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, a servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up
h and rebelled against his lord, 7and certain i worthless scoundrels gathered
about him and defied Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was
j young and irresolute [2] and could not withstand them.
8[†]“And now you think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the
hand of the sons of David, because you are a great multitude and have with
you k the golden calves that Jeroboam made you for gods. 9 l Have you not
driven out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and
made priests for yourselves like the peoples of other lands? Whoever comes
m for ordination [3] with a young bull or seven rams becomes a priest of
what are n no gods. 10But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not
forsaken him. We have priests ministering to the LORD who are sons of
Aaron, and Levites for their service. 11They offer to the LORD o every
morning and every evening burnt offerings and incense of sweet spices, set
out p the showbread on the table of pure gold, q and care for the golden
lampstand that its lamps may r burn every evening. For we s keep the
charge of the LORD our God, but you have forsaken him. 12Behold, God is
with us at our head, and his priests t with their battle trumpets to sound the
call to battle against you. O sons of Israel, u do not fight against the LORD,
the God of your fathers, for you cannot succeed.”
13[†]Jeroboam had sent v an ambush around to come upon them from
behind. Thus his troops [4] were in front of Judah, and the ambush was
behind them. 14And when Judah looked, behold, the battle was in front of
and behind them. w And they cried to the LORD, and the priests t blew the
trumpets. 15Then the men of Judah raised the battle shout. And when the
men of Judah shouted, x God defeated Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah
and Judah. 16The men of Israel fled before Judah, y and God gave them into
their hand. 17Abijah and his people struck them with great force, so there
fell slain of Israel 500,000 chosen men. 18Thus the men of Israel were
subdued at that time, and the men of Judah prevailed, z because they relied
on the LORD, the God of their fathers. 19And Abijah pursued Jeroboam
a and took cities from him, Bethel with its villages and Jeshanah with its
villages and b Ephron [5] with its villages. 20Jeroboam did not recover his
power in the days of Abijah. c And the LORD struck him down, d and he
died. 21[†]But Abijah grew mighty. And he took fourteen wives and had
twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters. 22[†]The rest of the acts of Abijah,
his ways and his sayings, are written in the e story of the prophet f Iddo.
Asa Reigns in Judah
2 CHRONICLES 14 [1] g Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in
the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his place. In his days the land
had rest for ten years. 2[†] [2] And Asa did what was good and right in the
eyes of the LORD his God. 3He took away the foreign altars h and the high
places and broke down i the pillars and cut down the j Asherim 4and
commanded Judah to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, and to keep
the law and the commandment. 5He also took out of all the cities of Judah
h the high places and the k incense altars. And the kingdom had rest under
him. 6He built l fortified cities in Judah, for the land had rest. He had no
war in those years, m for the LORD gave him peace. 7And he said to Judah,
“Let us build these cities and surround them with n walls and towers, gates
and bars. The land is still ours, because we have sought the LORD our God.
We have sought him, m and he has given us peace on every side.” So they
built and prospered. 8And Asa had an army of o 300,000 from Judah, armed
with large shields and spears, and 280,000 men from Benjamin that carried
shields and drew bows. All these were mighty men of valor.
9[†]Zerah p the Ethiopian came out against them with an army of a
million men and 300 chariots, and came as far as q Mareshah. 10And Asa
went out to meet him, and r they drew up their lines of battle in the Valley
of Zephathah at q Mareshah. 11And Asa s cried to the LORD his God, “O
LORD, there is none like you to help, between the mighty and the weak.
Help us, O LORD our God, t for we rely on you, u and in your name we have
come against this multitude. O LORD, you are our God; let not man prevail
against you.” 12 v So the LORD defeated the Ethiopians before Asa and
before Judah, and the Ethiopians fled. 13Asa and the people who were with
him pursued them as far as w Gerar, and the Ethiopians fell until none
remained alive, for they were broken before the LORD and his army. The
men of Judah [3] carried away very much spoil. 14And they attacked all the
cities around w Gerar, x for the fear of the LORD was upon them. They
plundered all the cities, for there was much plunder in them. 15And they
struck down the tents of those who had livestock and carried away sheep in
abundance and camels. Then they returned to Jerusalem.
Asa’s Religious Reforms