2 CHRONICLES 21 [†] d Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers and was buried
with his fathers in the city of David, and Jehoram his son reigned in his
place. 2[†]He had brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat: Azariah, Jehiel,
Zechariah, Azariah, Michael, and Shephatiah; all these were the sons of
Jehoshaphat king of e Israel. [1] 3Their father gave them great gifts of silver,
gold, and valuable possessions, together with f fortified cities in Judah, but
he gave the kingdom to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn. 4When
Jehoram had ascended the throne of his father and was established, he killed
all his brothers with the sword, and also some of the princes of e Israel.
5 g Jehoram was h thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned
eight years in Jerusalem. 6[†] i And he walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, as the house of Ahab had done, for j the daughter of Ahab was his
wife. And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD.
7[†]Yet the LORD
was not willing to destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that
he had made with David, and since he had promised to give k a lamp to him
and to his sons forever.
8[†]In his days Edom revolted from the l rule of Judah and set up a king
of their own. 9Then Jehoram passed over with his commanders and all his
chariots, and he rose by night and struck the Edomites who had surrounded
him and his chariot commanders. 10So Edom revolted from m the rule of
Judah to this day. At that time Libnah also revolted from his rule, because
he had forsaken the LORD, the God of his fathers.
11[†]Moreover, he made high places in the hill country of Judah and led
the inhabitants of Jerusalem n into whoredom and made Judah go astray.
12And a letter came to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, “Thus says the
LORD, the God of David your father, o ‘Because you have not walked in the
ways of Jehoshaphat your father, or p in the ways of Asa king of Judah,
13
i but have walked in the way of the kings of Israel and have enticed Judah
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem n into whoredom, q as the house of Ahab
led Israel into whoredom, and also you r have killed your brothers, of your
father’s house, who were better than you, 14behold, the LORD will bring a
great plague on your people, your children, your wives, and all your
possessions, 15and you yourself will have a severe sickness s with a disease
of your bowels, until your bowels come out because of the disease, day by
day.’”
16 t And the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the anger [2] of the
Philistines and of u the Arabians who are near the Ethiopians. 17And they
came up against Judah and invaded it and carried away all the possessions
they found that belonged to the king’s house, and also his sons and his
wives, so that no son was left to him except v Jehoahaz, his youngest son.
18And after all this the LORD struck him w in his bowels with an incurable
disease. 19In the course of time, at the end of two years, his bowels came
out because of the disease, and he died in great agony. His people made no
fire in his honor, x like the fires made for his fathers. 20 y He was thirty-two
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
And he departed z with no one’s regret. a They buried him in the city of
David, but not in the tombs of the kings.
Ahaziah Reigns in Judah