2 CHRONICLES 4 [†]He made k an altar of bronze, twenty cubits [1] long and
twenty cubits wide and ten cubits high. 2[†] l Then he made the sea of cast
metal. It was round, ten cubits from brim to brim, and five cubits high, and
a line of thirty cubits measured its circumference. 3Under it were figures of
gourds, [2] for ten cubits, compassing the sea all around. The gourds were in
two rows, cast with it when it was cast. 4It stood on twelve oxen, three
facing north, three facing west, three facing south, and three facing east.
The sea was set on them, and all their rear parts were inward. 5Its thickness
was a handbreadth. [3] And its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like the
flower of a lily. m It held 3,000 baths. [4] 6 n He also made ten basins in
which to wash, and set five on the south side, and five on the north side. In
these they were to rinse off what was used for the burnt offering, and the
sea was for the priests to wash in.
7And he made ten golden lampstands o as prescribed, and set them in the
temple, five on the south side and five on the north. 8
p He also made ten
tables and placed them in the temple, five on the south side and five on the
north. And he made a hundred basins of gold. 9[†]He made q the court of
the priests r and the great court and doors for the court and overlaid their
doors with bronze. 10
s And he set the sea at the southeast corner of the
house.
11[†] t u Hiram also made the pots, the shovels, and the basins. u So Hiram
finished the work that he did for King Solomon on the house of God: 12the
two pillars, v the bowls, and the two capitals on the top of the pillars; and
the two latticeworks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the
top of the pillars; 13 w and the 400 pomegranates for the two latticeworks,
two rows of pomegranates for each latticework, to cover the two bowls of
the capitals that were on the pillars. 14 n He made the stands also, and the
basins on the stands, 15and the one sea, and the twelve oxen underneath it.
16The pots, the shovels, x the forks, and all the equipment for these
t y Huram-abi made of burnished bronze for King Solomon for the house of
the LORD.
17In the plain of the Jordan the king cast them, in the clay ground
between Succoth and Zeredah. [5] 18 z Solomon made all these things in great
quantities, for the weight of the bronze was not sought.
19[†]So Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of God: the
golden altar, a the tables for the bread of the Presence, 20the lampstands and
their lamps of pure gold b to burn before the inner sanctuary, as prescribed;
21the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs, of purest gold; 22the snuffers,
basins, dishes for incense, and fire pans, of pure gold, and the sockets [6] of
the temple, for the inner doors to the Most Holy Place and for the doors of
the nave of the temple were of gold.
2 CHRONICLES 5 c Thus all the work that Solomon did for the house of
the LORD was finished. And Solomon brought in the things that David his
father had dedicated, and stored the silver, the gold, and all the vessels in
the treasuries of the house of God.
The Ark Brought to the Temple
2[†]Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the
tribes, the leaders of the fathers’ houses of the people of Israel, in
Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of d the city
of David, which is Zion. 3And all the men of Israel assembled before the
king at the feast that is in the seventh month. 4And all the elders of Israel
came, e and the Levites took up the ark. 5[†]And they brought up the ark,
the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent; f the
Levitical priests brought them up. 6And King Solomon and all the
congregation of Israel, who had assembled before him, were before the ark,
sacrificing so many sheep and oxen that they could not be counted or
numbered. 7[†]Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of the LORD
to its place, in the inner sanctuary of the house, in the Most Holy Place,
underneath the wings of the cherubim. 8The cherubim spread out their
wings over the place of the ark, so that the cherubim made a covering above
the ark and its poles. 9And the poles were so long that the ends of the poles
were seen g from the Holy Place before the inner sanctuary, but they could
not be seen from outside. And they are [1] there to this day.
10[†]There was
nothing in the ark except the two tablets h that Moses put there at Horeb,
where the LORD made a covenant with the people of Israel, when they came
out of Egypt. 11[†]And when the priests came out of the Holy Place (for all
the priests who were present had consecrated themselves, without regard to
i their divisions, 12and all the Levitical j singers, k Asaph, l Heman, and
Jeduthun, their sons and kinsmen, arrayed in fine linen, with m cymbals,
harps, and lyres, stood east of the altar with 120 n priests who were
trumpeters; 13and it was the duty of the trumpeters and singers to make
themselves heard in unison in praise and thanksgiving to the LORD), and
when the song was raised, o with trumpets and cymbals and other musical
instruments, in praise to the LORD,
p “For he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever,”
the house, the house of the LORD, was filled with a cloud, 14so that the
priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud, q for the glory of
the LORD filled the house of God.
Solomon Blesses the People