2 CHRONICLES 24 [†] c Joash [1] was seven years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah of
Beersheba. 2[†] d And Joash did what was right in the eyes of the LORD all
the days of Jehoiada the priest. 3[†]Jehoiada got for him two wives, and he
had sons and daughters.
4[†]After this Joash e decided to f restore the house of the LORD.
5[†]And
he gathered the priests and the Levites and said to them, “Go out to the
cities of g Judah and gather from all Israel money to repair the house of
your God from year to year, and see that you act quickly.” But the Levites
did not act quickly.
6So the king summoned Jehoiada the chief and said to
him, “Why have you not required the Levites to bring in from Judah and
Jerusalem h the tax levied by Moses, the servant of the LORD, and the
congregation of Israel for i the tent of testimony?” 7For j the sons of
Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken into the house of God, and had
also used all k the dedicated things of the house of the LORD for the Baals.
8[†]So the king commanded, and they made a chest and set it outside the
gate of the house of the LORD.
9And l proclamation was made throughout
Judah and Jerusalem to bring in for the LORD h the tax that Moses the
servant of God laid on Israel in the wilderness. 10And all the princes and all
the people rejoiced and brought their tax and dropped it into the chest until
they had finished. [2] 11And whenever the chest was brought to the king’s
officers by the Levites, when they saw that there was much money in it, the
king’s secretary and the officer of the chief priest would come and empty
the chest and take it and return it to its place. Thus they did day after day,
and collected money in abundance. 12And the king and Jehoiada gave it to
those who had charge of the work of the house of the LORD, and they hired
masons and carpenters to restore the house of the LORD, and also workers in
iron and bronze to repair the house of the LORD.
13So those who were
engaged in the work labored, and the repairing went forward in their hands,
and they restored the house of God to its proper condition and strengthened
it. 14[†]And when they had finished, they brought the rest of the money
before the king and Jehoiada, and with it m were made utensils for the house
of the LORD, both for the service and for the burnt offerings, and dishes for
incense and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in
the house of the LORD regularly all the days of Jehoiada.
15[†]But Jehoiada grew old and full of days, and died. He was 130 years
old at his death. 16And they buried him in the city of David among the
kings, because he had done good in Israel, and toward God and his house.
17Now after the death of Jehoiada the princes of Judah came and paid
homage to the king. Then the king listened to them. 18And they abandoned
the house of the LORD, the God of their fathers, and served o the Asherim
and the idols. And p wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this guilt of
theirs. 19 q Yet he sent prophets among them to bring them back to the LORD.
r These testified against them, but they would not pay attention.
Joash’s Treachery
20 s Then the Spirit of God clothed Zechariah t the son of Jehoiada the priest,
and he stood above the people, and said to them, “Thus says God, u ‘Why
do you break the commandments of the LORD, so that you cannot prosper?
v Because you have forsaken the LORD, he has forsaken you.’” 21But w they
conspired against him, x and by command of the king they stoned him with
stones in the court of the house of the LORD.
22Thus Joash the king did not
remember the kindness that Jehoiada, Zechariah’s father, had shown him,
but killed his son. And when he was dying, he said, “May the LORD see
y and avenge!” [3]
Joash Assassinated
23[†]At the end of the year z the army of the Syrians came up against Joash.
They came to Judah and Jerusalem and destroyed all the princes of the
people from among the people and sent all their spoil to the king of
Damascus. 24Though the army of the Syrians had come with few men, a the
LORD delivered into their hand a very great army, v because Judah [4] had
forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers. Thus they b executed judgment
on Joash.
25When they had departed from him, leaving him c severely wounded,
d his servants conspired against him because of the blood of e the son [5] of
Jehoiada the priest, and killed him on his bed. So he died, and they buried
him in the city of David, f but they did not bury him in the tombs of the
kings. 26Those who conspired against him were Zabad the son of Shimeath
the Ammonite, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabite. 27Accounts
of his sons and of the many oracles against him and of g the rebuilding [6] of
the house of God are written in the h Story of the Book of the Kings. And
Amaziah his son reigned in his place.
Amaziah Reigns in Judah