2 CHRONICLES 33 [†] j Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem. 2[†]And he did what was
evil in the sight of the LORD, according to k the abominations of the nations
whom the LORD drove out before the people of Israel. 3For he rebuilt the
high places l that his father Hezekiah had broken down, and he erected
altars to the Baals, and made m Asheroth, and worshiped all the host of
heaven and served them. 4And he built altars in the house of the LORD, of
which the LORD had said, n “In Jerusalem shall my name be forever.” 5And
he built altars for all the host of heaven in o the two courts of the house of
the LORD.
6
p And he burned his sons as an offering q in the Valley of the
Son of Hinnom, and r used fortune-telling and omens and sorcery, and dealt
with s mediums and with necromancers. He did much evil in the sight of the
LORD, provoking him to anger.
7And t the carved image of the idol that he
had made he set in the house of God, of which God said to David and to
Solomon his son, “In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out
of all the tribes of Israel, n I will put my name forever,
8and I will no more
remove the foot of Israel from the land u that I appointed for your fathers, if
only they will be careful to do all that I have commanded them, all the law,
the statutes, and the rules given through Moses.” 9Manasseh led Judah and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem astray, to do more evil than the nations whom
the LORD destroyed before the people of Israel.
Manasseh’s Repentance
10[†]The LORD spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they paid no
attention. 11
v Therefore the LORD brought upon them the commanders of the
army of the king of Assyria, who captured Manasseh with hooks and
w bound him with chains of bronze and brought him to Babylon. 12[†]And
when he was in distress, he entreated the favor of the LORD his God x and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. 13He prayed to him,
and y God was moved by his entreaty and heard his plea and brought him
again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. z Then Manasseh knew that the LORD
was God.
14Afterward he built an outer wall for the city of David west of a Gihon,
in the valley, and for the entrance into b the Fish Gate, and carried it around
c Ophel, and raised it to a very great height. He also put commanders of the
army in all the fortified cities in Judah. 15[†]And d he took away the foreign
gods and the idol from the house of the LORD, and all the altars that he had
built on the mountain of the house of the LORD and in Jerusalem, and he
threw them outside of the city.
16He also restored the altar of the LORD and
offered on it sacrifices of peace offerings and of thanksgiving, and he
commanded Judah to serve the LORD, the God of Israel. 17
e Nevertheless,
the people still sacrificed at the high places, but only to the LORD their God.
18Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and f his prayer to his God, and
the words of g the seers who spoke to him in the name of the LORD, the God
of Israel, behold, they are in the h Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
19[†]And his prayer, and how y God was moved by his entreaty, and all his
sin and his faithlessness, and the sites i on which he built high places and
set up the i Asherim and the images, before x he humbled himself, behold,
they are written in the Chronicles of the Seers. [1] 20So Manasseh slept with
his fathers, and they buried him in his house, and Amon his son reigned in
his place.
Amon’s Reign and Death
21[†] j Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned two years in Jerusalem. 22And he did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, as Manasseh his father had done. Amon sacrificed to all the
images k that Manasseh his father had made, and served them. 23And he did
not humble himself before the LORD, l as Manasseh his father had humbled
himself, but this Amon incurred guilt more and more. 24And his servants
conspired against him and put him to death in his house. 25But the people of
the land struck down all those who had conspired against King Amon. And
the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his place.
Josiah Reigns in Judah