2 CHRONICLES 17 [†]Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his place and
strengthened himself against Israel. 2He placed forces in all the n fortified
cities of Judah and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of
Ephraim o that Asa his father had captured. 3The LORD was with
Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the earlier ways of his father David. He
did not seek the Baals, 4but sought the God of his father and walked in his
commandments, p and not according to the practices of Israel. 5Therefore
the LORD established the kingdom in his hand. And all Judah q brought
tribute to Jehoshaphat, r and he had great riches and honor.
6His heart was
courageous in the ways of the LORD. And furthermore, s he took the high
places and the Asherim out of Judah.
7[†]In the third year of his reign he sent his officials, Ben-hail, Obadiah,
Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah, t to teach in the cities of Judah; 8 u and
with them the Levites, Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel,
Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tobadonijah; and with
these Levites, the priests Elishama and Jehoram. 9And t they taught in
Judah, having the Book of the Law of the LORD with them. They went about
through all the cities of Judah and taught among the people.
10[†] v And the fear of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
that were around Judah, and they made no war against Jehoshaphat. 11Some
of the Philistines w brought Jehoshaphat presents and silver for tribute, and
the Arabians also brought him 7,700 rams and 7,700 goats. 12[†]And
Jehoshaphat grew steadily greater. He built in Judah fortresses and store
cities, 13and he had large supplies in the cities of Judah. He had soldiers,
mighty men of valor, in Jerusalem. 14This was the muster of them by
fathers’ houses: Of Judah, the commanders of thousands: Adnah the
commander, with 300,000 mighty men of valor; 15and next to him
Jehohanan the commander, with 280,000; 16and next to him Amasiah the
son of Zichri, x a volunteer for the service of the LORD, with 200,000
mighty men of valor.
17Of Benjamin: Eliada, a mighty man of valor, with
200,000 men y armed with bow and shield; 18and next to him Jehozabad
with 180,000 armed for war.
19These were in the service of the king,
besides z those whom the king had placed in the fortified cities throughout
all Judah.
Jehoshaphat Allies with Ahab