2 CHRONICLES 2 [†] [1] x Now Solomon purposed to build a temple for the
name of the LORD, and a royal palace for himself. 2[†] [2] y And Solomon
assigned 70,000 men to bear burdens and 80,000 to quarry in the hill
country, and z 3,600 to oversee them. 3[†] a And Solomon sent word to
Hiram the king of Tyre: b “As you dealt with David my father and sent him
cedar to build himself a house to dwell in, so deal with me. 4Behold, I am
about to build a house for the name of the LORD my God and dedicate it to
him for the burning of c incense of sweet spices before him, and for d the
regular arrangement of the showbread, and for e burnt offerings morning
and evening, f on the Sabbaths and the new moons and the appointed feasts
of the LORD our God, as ordained forever for Israel. 5The house that I am to
build will be great, g for our God is greater than all gods. 6[†] h But who is
able to build him a house, since h heaven, even highest heaven, cannot
contain him? Who am I to build a house for him, except as a place to make
offerings before him? 7So now i send me a man skilled to work in gold,
silver, bronze, and iron, and in purple, crimson, and blue fabrics, trained
also in engraving, to be with the skilled workers who are with me in Judah
and Jerusalem, j whom David my father provided. 8Send me also cedar,
cypress, and algum timber from Lebanon, for I know that k your servants
know how to cut timber in Lebanon. And my servants will be with your
servants, 9to prepare timber for me in abundance, for the house I am to
build will be great and wonderful. 10 l I will give for your servants, the
woodsmen who cut timber, 20,000 cors [3] of crushed wheat, 20,000 cors of
barley, 20,000 baths [4] of wine, and 20,000 baths of oil.”
11[†]Then Hiram the king of Tyre answered in a letter that he sent to
Solomon, m “Because the LORD loves his people, he has made you king
over them.” 12Hiram also said, “Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, n who
made heaven and earth, who has given King David a wise son, who has
discretion and understanding, o who will build a temple for the LORD and a
royal palace for himself.
13“Now I have sent a skilled man, who has understanding, Huram-abi,
14
p the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of
Tyre. He is q trained to work in gold, silver, bronze, iron, stone, and wood,
and in purple, blue, and crimson fabrics and fine linen, and to do all sorts of
engraving and execute any design that may be assigned him, with your
craftsmen, the craftsmen of my lord, David your father.
15Now therefore the
wheat and barley, oil and wine, r of which my lord has spoken, let him send
to his servants. 16 s And we will cut whatever timber you need from
Lebanon and bring it to you in rafts by sea to t Joppa, so that you may take
it up to Jerusalem.”
17Then Solomon counted all the resident aliens who were in the land of
Israel, u after the census of them that David his father had taken, and there
were found 153,600. 18
v Seventy thousand of them he assigned to bear
burdens, 80,000 to quarry in the hill country, and 3,600 as overseers to
make the people work.
Solomon Builds the Temple