2 CORINTHIANS 12 [†]I must go on boasting. Though there is nothing to be
gained by it, I will go on to visions and x revelations of the Lord. 2[†]I know
a man y in Christ who fourteen years ago was z caught up to a the third
heaven—whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, b God
knows. 3And I know that this man was caught up into c paradise—whether
in the body or out of the body I do not know, b God knows— 4and he heard
things that cannot be told, which man may not utter.
5On behalf of this man
I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, d except of my
weaknesses— 6though if I should wish to boast, e I would not be a fool, for
I would be speaking the truth; but I refrain from it, so that no one may think
more of me than he sees in me or hears from me. 7[†]So f to keep me from
becoming conceited because of the surpassing greatness of the
revelations, [1] g a thorn was given me in the flesh, h a messenger of Satan to
harass me, to keep me from becoming conceited. 8 i Three times I pleaded
with the Lord about this, that it should leave me. 9[†]But he said to me,
j “My grace is sufficient for you, for k my power is made perfect in
weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly of my weaknesses, so
that l the power of Christ may rest upon me. 10 m For the sake of Christ,
then, n I am content with weaknesses, insults, hardships, persecutions, and
calamities. For o when I am weak, then I am strong.
Concern for the Corinthian Church
11[†] p I have been a fool! You forced me to it, for I ought to have been
commended by you. For I was q not at all inferior to these super-apostles,
r even though I am nothing. 12[†] s The signs of a true apostle were
performed among you t with utmost patience, with signs and wonders and
mighty works. 13[†]For in what were you less favored than the rest of the
churches, except that u I myself did not burden you? Forgive me this
wrong!
14[†]Here v for the third time I am ready to come to you. And I will not
be a burden, for w I seek not what is yours but you. For x children are not
obligated to save up for their parents, but y parents for their children. 15 z I
will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls. If a I love you more, am
I to be loved less? 16[†]But granting that b I myself did not burden you, I
was crafty, you say, and got the better of you by deceit. 17Did I take
advantage of you c through any of those whom I sent to you? 18
d I urged
Titus to go, and sent e the brother with him. Did Titus take advantage of
you? Did we not act in the same spirit? Did we not take the same steps?
19Have you been thinking all along that we have been defending
ourselves to you? It is f in the sight of God that we have been speaking in
Christ, and g all for your upbuilding, beloved. 20[†]For I fear that perhaps
h when I come I may find you not as I wish, and that you may find me not
as you wish—that perhaps there may be quarreling, jealousy, anger,
hostility, slander, gossip, conceit, and disorder.
21[†]I fear that when I come
again my God may humble me before you, and I may have to mourn over
many of those i who sinned earlier and have not repented of the impurity,
j sexual immorality, and sensuality that they have practiced.
Final Warnings