2 JOHN 1 [†] a The elder to the elect lady and her children, b whom I love in
truth, and not only I, but also all who c know d the truth, 2[†] e because of
the truth that abides in us and will be with us forever:
3 f Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us, from God the Father and from
Jesus Christ the Father’s Son, in truth and love.
Walking in Truth and Love
4[†] g I rejoiced greatly to find some of your children walking in the truth,
just as we were commanded by the Father.
5[†]And now I ask you, dear
lady— h not as though I were writing you a new commandment, but the one
we have had from the beginning— i that we love one another.
6[†]And j this
is love, that we walk according to his commandments; this is the
commandment, just k as you have heard from the beginning, so that you
should walk in it. 7[†]For l many deceivers m have gone out into the world,
n those who do not confess the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh. Such a
one is the deceiver and the antichrist. 8[†]Watch yourselves, o so that you
may not lose what we [1] have worked for, but p may win a full reward.
9[†]Everyone who goes on ahead and does not abide in the teaching of
Christ, q does not have God. Whoever abides in the teaching q has both the
Father and the Son. 10[†]If anyone comes to you and does not bring this
teaching, r do not receive him into your house or give him any greeting,
11[†]for whoever greets him s takes part in his wicked works.
Final Greetings
12[†] t Though I have much to write to you, I would rather not use paper and
ink. u Instead I hope to come to you and talk face to face, v so that our joy
may be complete.
13[†]The children of your elect sister greet you.
Study Notes for 2 John
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 1–3 Greeting: The Elder’ s Love. Love frames the
opening section, appearing in vv. 1 and 3.
FACT
The elder (v. 1) is clearly a self-description of the apostle John. “Elder”
was a common term for a pastoral leader in the early church (see Titus
1:5; 1 Pet. 5:1). Although “elder” does not imply “elderly,” John himself
was probably quite old when he wrote this letter.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 1 The elect lady and her children probably refers to a
local congregation and its members. The word truth is prominent in John’s
greeting, perhaps because early Christians saw themselves as being in close
communion with Jesus, who called himself “the truth” (see note on John
14:6) and whom they acknowledged as such, and perhaps because John
knows he will also have to write about the untruth of spiritual deceivers (2
John 7–11).
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 2 abides in us. The gospel unites John and his readers.
“In us” could be translated “among us.”
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 4–6 The Elder’ s Joy and Request. John wants his
readers’ behavior to reflect their faith.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 4 Apparently John had encountered members of the
congregation who were, in fact, walking in the truth, i.e., living in a
manner pleasing to God. Perhaps it was from them that he determined he
needed to pen this letter to their church.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 5 Love one another may suggest there was division
among the readers. On love, see note on John 13:34–35.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 6 Commandment probably refers to the love
commandment introduced by Jesus (John 13:34–35).
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 7–8 The Elder’ s Concern. Doctrinal confusion was a
threat to the congregation.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 7 the coming of . . . Christ in the flesh. See 1 John 4:2
and note. antichrist. See 1 John 2:18 and note. many deceivers. On false
teaching, see note on Matt. 7:15–20.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 8 Watch yourselves. Compare Mark 13:5, 23. win a full
reward. Eternal life with Christ.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 9–11 The Elder’ s Warning. The congregation must
not listen to persons who do not “abide in the teaching of Christ” (v. 9).
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 9 Goes on ahead probably refers to a “new” teaching that
amounted to rejection of the apostolic faith. Does not have God, i.e., does
not have eternal life in fellowship with God. Threats to church purity come
not only from the outside but often from within. Similarly, Paul wrote that
some at Corinth had “no knowledge of God” (1 Cor. 15:34).
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 10 If anyone comes refers to traveling teachers or
preachers who rejected true Christian teaching. do not receive him into
your house. Since believers gathered in homes to worship, this could give
the appearance of agreeing with the false teaching. This does not prohibit
showing hospitality to unbelievers (see Matt. 9:10–13; 1 Cor. 5:9–10);
rather, it is false Christians who require caution and perhaps rejection (see 1
Cor. 5:11–13).
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 11 Greets means to extend approval, assistance, and full
fellowship. takes part in his wicked works. To support someone who is
working against the true Christian message is to share in that person’s guilt.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 12–13 Closing: The Elder’ s Farewell. John hopes to
follow this letter with a visit.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 12 so that our joy may be complete. See 1 John 1:4 and
note.
2 JOHN—NOTE ON 13 Children of your elect sister are the believers in the
congregation from which John writes.
3 John
Study Notes
3 John
(return to table of contents)
Greeting