2 KINGS 13 [†]In the twenty-third year of Joash the son of Ahaziah, king of
Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and
he reigned seventeen years. 2He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD
and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, m which he made Israel
to sin; he did not depart from them. 3 n And the anger of the LORD was
kindled against Israel, and he gave them continually into the hand of
o Hazael king of Syria and into the hand of p Ben-hadad the son of Hazael.
4[†]Then Jehoahaz q sought the favor of the LORD, and the LORD listened to
him, r for he saw the oppression of Israel, how the king of Syria oppressed
them. 5(Therefore the LORD gave Israel s a savior, so that they escaped from
the hand of the Syrians, and the people of Israel lived in t their homes as
formerly.
6[†]Nevertheless, they did not depart from the sins of the house of
Jeroboam, m which he made Israel to sin, but walked [1] in them; and u the
Asherah also remained in Samaria.) 7[†]For there was not left to Jehoahaz
an army of more than fifty horsemen and ten chariots and ten thousand
footmen, for the king of Syria had destroyed them and made them like the
dust v at threshing. 8Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz and all that he did,
and his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the
Kings of Israel? 9[†]So Jehoahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him
in Samaria, and Joash his son reigned in his place.
Jehoash Reigns in Israel
10In the thirty-seventh year of Joash king of Judah, Jehoash [2] the son of
Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned sixteen
years. 11He also did what was evil in the sight of the LORD. He did not
depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, m which he made
Israel to sin, but he walked in them. 12 w Now the rest of the acts of Joash
x and all that he did, y and the might with which he fought against Amaziah
king of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the
Kings of Israel? 13So Joash slept with his fathers, and Jeroboam sat on his
throne. And Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.
The Death of Elisha
14[†]Now when Elisha had fallen sick with the illness of which he was to
die, Joash king of Israel went down to him and wept before him, crying,
z “My father, my father! The chariots of Israel and its horsemen!” 15And
Elisha said to him, “Take a bow and arrows.” So he took a bow and arrows.
16Then he said to the king of Israel, “Draw the bow,” and he drew it. And
Elisha laid his hands on the king’s hands. 17And he said, “Open the window
eastward,” and he opened it. Then Elisha said, “Shoot,” and he shot. And he
said, “The LORD’s arrow of victory, the arrow of victory over Syria! For you
shall fight the Syrians in a Aphek until you have made an end of them.”
18And he said, “Take the arrows,” and he took them. And he said to the king
of Israel, “Strike the ground with them.” And he struck three times and
stopped. 19Then b the man of God was angry with him and said, “You
should have struck five or six times; then you would have struck down
Syria until you had made an end of it, but now you will strike down Syria
only c three times.”
20[†]So Elisha died, and they buried him. Now bands of d Moabites used
to invade the land in the spring of the year.
21And as a man was being
buried, behold, a marauding band was seen and the man was thrown into
the grave of Elisha, and as soon as the man touched the bones of Elisha, he
revived and stood on his feet.
22 e Now Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.
23[†] f But the LORD was gracious to them and had compassion on them,
g and he turned toward them, h because of his covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, nor has he cast them from his
presence until now.
24When Hazael king of Syria died, Ben-hadad his son became king in his
place. 25[†]Then Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again from Ben-hadad
the son of Hazael the cities i that he had taken from Jehoahaz his father in
war. j Three times Joash defeated him and recovered the cities of Israel.
Amaziah Reigns in Judah