2 KINGS 22 [†] a Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jedidah the
daughter of Adaiah of b Bozkath. 2[†]And he did what was right in the eyes
of the LORD and walked in all the way of David his father, c and he did not
turn aside to the right or to the left.
Josiah Repairs the Temple
3[†]In the eighteenth year of King Josiah, the king sent Shaphan the son of
Azaliah, son of Meshullam, the secretary, to the house of the LORD, saying,
4“Go up to d Hilkiah the high priest, that he may count the money e that has
been brought into the house of the LORD, which f the keepers of the
threshold have collected from the people. 5 g And let it be given into the
hand of the workmen who have the oversight of the house of the LORD, and
let them give it to the workmen who are at the house of the LORD, repairing
the house 6(that is, to the carpenters, and to the builders, and to the masons),
and let them use it for buying timber and quarried stone to repair the house.
7But h no accounting shall be asked from them for the money that is
delivered into their hand, for they deal honestly.”
Hilkiah Finds the Book of the Law
8[†]And Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the secretary, “I have found
i the Book of the Law in the house of the LORD.” And Hilkiah gave the book
to Shaphan, and he read it. 9And Shaphan the secretary came to the king,
and reported to the king, “Your servants have emptied out the money that
was found in the house and have delivered it into the hand of the workmen
who have the oversight of the house of the LORD.” 10Then Shaphan the
secretary told the king, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a book.” And
Shaphan read it before the king.
11[†]When the king heard the words of the Book of the Law, j he tore his
clothes. 12And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and k Ahikam the
son of Shaphan, and l Achbor the son of l Micaiah, and Shaphan the
secretary, and Asaiah the king’s servant, saying, 13“Go, inquire of the LORD
for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this
book that has been found. For great is m the wrath of the LORD that is
kindled against us, because our fathers have not obeyed the words of this
book, to do according to all that is written concerning us.”
14[†]So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and
Asaiah went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of
n Tikvah, son of n Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe (now she lived in
Jerusalem in o the Second Quarter), and they talked with her.
15And she said
to them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘Tell the man who sent
you to me, 16Thus says the LORD, Behold, I will bring disaster upon this
place and upon its inhabitants, all the words of the book that the king of
Judah has read. 17 p Because they have forsaken me and have made offerings
to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the work of their
hands, therefore m my wrath will be kindled against this place, and it will
not be quenched. 18But to the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the
LORD, thus shall you say to him, Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel:
Regarding the words that you have heard, 19 q because your heart was
penitent, and you r humbled yourself before the LORD, when you heard how
I spoke against this place and against its inhabitants, that they should
become s a desolation and t a curse, and you u have torn your clothes and
wept before me, I also have heard you, declares the LORD.
20[†]Therefore,
behold, I will gather you to your fathers, and v you shall be gathered to your
grave in peace, and your eyes shall not see all the disaster that I will bring
upon this place.’” And they brought back word to the king.
Josiah’s Reforms
2 KINGS 23 w Then the king sent, and all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem
were gathered to him. 2[†]And the king went up to the house of the LORD,
and with him all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem and
the priests and the prophets, all the people, both small and great. And x he
read in their hearing all the words of the Book of the Covenant y that had
been found in the house of the LORD.
3And the king stood z by the pillar and
a made a covenant before the LORD, b to walk after the LORD and to keep his
commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all his heart and all
his soul, to perform the words of this covenant that were written in this
book. And all the people joined in the covenant.
4[†]And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest and the priests c of
the second order and the keepers of the threshold to bring out of the temple
of the LORD all the vessels made for d Baal, for e Asherah, and for all the
host of heaven. f He burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields of the
Kidron and carried their ashes to Bethel. 5And he deposed the priests whom
the kings of Judah had ordained to make offerings in the high places at the
cities of Judah and around Jerusalem; those also who burned incense to
Baal, to the sun and the moon and the constellations g and all the host of the
heavens. 6And he brought out h the Asherah from the house of the LORD,
outside Jerusalem, to the brook Kidron, i and burned it at the brook Kidron
j and beat it to dust and cast the dust of it upon the graves k of the common
people. 7And he broke down the houses of l the male cult prostitutes who
were in the house of the LORD, m where the women wove hangings for h the
Asherah. 8[†]And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and
defiled the high places where the priests had made offerings, from n Geba to
Beersheba. And he broke down the high places of the gates that were at the
entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on one’s
left at the gate of the city.
9
o However, the priests of the high places did not
come up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, but they ate unleavened
bread among their brothers. 10[†]And he defiled p Topheth, which is q in the
Valley of the Son of Hinnom, r that no one might burn his son or his
daughter as an offering to s Molech. [1] 11[†]And he removed the horses that
the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun, at the entrance to the house of
the LORD, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the chamberlain, which was in
the precincts. [2] And he burned the chariots of the sun with fire. 12[†]And
the altars t on the roof of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of
Judah had made, and the altars u that Manasseh had made in the two courts
of the house of the LORD, he pulled down and broke in pieces [3] and cast
the dust of them v into the brook Kidron. 13[†]And the king defiled the high
places that were east of Jerusalem, to the south of w the mount of
corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had built for x Ashtoreth the
abomination of the Sidonians, and for y Chemosh the abomination of Moab,
and for z Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. 14[†]And he broke in
pieces the a pillars and cut down the Asherim and filled their places with the
bones of men.
15[†]Moreover, the altar at Bethel, the high place erected b by Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, c who made Israel to sin, d that altar with the high place
he pulled down and burned, [4] reducing it to dust. He also burned the
Asherah. 16And as Josiah turned, he saw the tombs there on the mount. And
he sent and took the bones out of the tombs and burned them on the altar
and defiled it, e according to the word of the LORD that the man of God
proclaimed, who had predicted these things. 17Then he said, “What is that
monument that I see?” And the men of the city told him, f “It is the tomb of
the man of God who came from Judah and predicted [5] these things that
you have done against the altar at Bethel.” 18And he said, “Let him be; let
no man move his bones.” So they let his bones alone, with the bones g of
the prophet who came out of Samaria. 19And Josiah removed all the shrines
also of the high places that were h in the cities of Samaria, which kings of
Israel had made, provoking the LORD to anger. He did to them according to
all that he had done at Bethel. 20And i he sacrificed all the priests of the
high places who were there, on the altars, j and burned human bones on
them. Then he returned to Jerusalem.
Josiah Restores the Passover
21And the king commanded all the people, k “Keep the Passover to the
LORD your God, l as it is written in this Book of the Covenant.” 22[†] m For
no such Passover had been kept since the days of the judges who judged
Israel, or during all the days of the kings of Israel or of the kings of Judah.
23But in the eighteenth year of King Josiah this Passover was kept to the
LORD in Jerusalem.
24[†]Moreover, Josiah put away n the mediums and the necromancers and
o the household gods and p the idols and all the abominations that were seen
in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, that he might establish q the words of
the law that were written in the book r that Hilkiah the priest found in the
house of the LORD.
25[†] s Before him there was no king like him, who
turned to the LORD with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his
might, according to all the Law of Moses, nor did any like him arise after
him.
26[†]Still the LORD did not turn from the burning of his great wrath, by
which his anger was kindled against Judah, t because of all the provocations
with which Manasseh had provoked him. 27And the LORD said, “I will
remove Judah also out of my sight, u as I have removed Israel, and I will
cast off this city that I have chosen, Jerusalem, v and the house of which I
said, My name shall be there.”
Josiah’s Death in Battle
28[†]Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and all that he did, are they not
written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 29 w In his days
x Pharaoh Neco king of Egypt went up to the king of Assyria to the river
Euphrates. King Josiah went to meet him, and Pharaoh Neco killed him at
y Megiddo, as soon as he saw him. 30
z And his servants carried him dead in
a chariot from y Megiddo and brought him to Jerusalem and buried him in
his own tomb. a And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah,
and anointed him, and made him king in his father’s place.
Jehoahaz’s Reign and Captivity
31[†] b Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was c Hamutal the
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 32And he did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, d according to all that his fathers had done. 33And x Pharaoh
Neco put him in bonds at e Riblah in the land of f Hamath, that he might not
reign in Jerusalem, and laid on the land a tribute of a hundred talents [6] of
silver and a talent of gold. 34And x Pharaoh Neco made Eliakim the son of
Josiah king in the place of Josiah his father, and g changed his name to
Jehoiakim. But he took Jehoahaz away, h and he came to Egypt and died
there. 35And Jehoiakim i gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh, but he
taxed the land to give the money according to the command of Pharaoh. He
exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, from everyone
according to his assessment, to give it to Pharaoh Neco.
Jehoiakim Reigns in Judah
36[†] j Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zebidah the
daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. 37And he did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, d according to all that his fathers had done.
2 KINGS 24 k In his days, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and
Jehoiakim became his servant for three years. Then he turned and rebelled
against him. 2[†]And the LORD sent against him bands of the l Chaldeans
and m bands of the Syrians and bands of the Moabites and bands of the
Ammonites, and sent them against Judah to destroy it, n according to the
word of the LORD that he spoke by his servants the prophets. 3Surely this
came upon Judah at the command of the LORD, to remove them out of his
sight, o for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he had done, 4and
also p for the innocent blood that he had shed. For he filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood, and the LORD would not pardon. 5[†] q Now the rest of the
deeds of Jehoiakim and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of
the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 6So Jehoiakim r slept with his
fathers, and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his place. 7
s And the king of
Egypt did not come again out of his land, t for the king of Babylon had
taken all that belonged to the king of Egypt u from the Brook of Egypt to
the river Euphrates.
Jehoiachin Reigns in Judah
8[†] v Jehoiachin was w eighteen years old when he became king, and he
reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Nehushta the
daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. 9And he did what was evil in the sight
of the LORD, x according to all that his father had done.
Jerusalem Captured
10At that time the servants of y Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up to
Jerusalem, and the city was besieged. 11And y Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon came to the city while his servants were besieging it, 12 z and
Jehoiachin the king of Judah gave himself up to the king of Babylon,
himself and his mother and his servants and his officials and his palace
officials. a The king of Babylon took him prisoner b in the eighth year of his
reign 13and carried off all the treasures of the house of the LORD c and the
treasures of the king’s house, d and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold in
the temple of the LORD, e which Solomon king of Israel had made, f as the
LORD had foretold. 14
g He carried away all Jerusalem and all the officials
and all the mighty men of valor, h 10,000 captives, i and all the craftsmen
and the smiths. None remained, j except the poorest people of the land.
15
k And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon. The king’s mother, the
king’s wives, his officials, and the chief men of the land he took into
captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon. 16And the king of Babylon brought
captive to Babylon all the men of valor, l 7,000, and the craftsmen and the
metal workers, 1,000, all of them strong and fit for war.
17
m And the king of
Babylon n made Mattaniah, o Jehoiachin’s uncle, king in his place, p and
changed his name to Zedekiah.
Zedekiah Reigns in Judah
18[†] q Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he
reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was r Hamutal the
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 19And he did what was evil in the sight of
the LORD, s according to all that Jehoiakim had done. 20For because of the
anger of the LORD it came to the point in Jerusalem and Judah that he cast
them out from his presence.
t And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
Fall and Captivity of Judah
2 KINGS 25 u And in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, on the
tenth day of the month, v Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came with all
his army against Jerusalem and laid siege to it. w And they built siegeworks
all around it. 2So the city was besieged till the eleventh year of King
Zedekiah. 3On the ninth day of the fourth month x the famine was so severe
in the city that there was no food for the people of the land. 4Then a breach
was made in the city, and all the men of war fled by night by the way of the
gate between the two walls, by y the king’s garden, and z the Chaldeans
were around the city. And they went in the direction of the a Arabah. 5But
the army of the Chaldeans pursued the king and overtook him in the plains
of Jericho, and all his army was scattered from him. 6Then they captured
the king b and brought him up to the king of Babylon at c Riblah, and they
passed sentence on him. 7They slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah before his
eyes, d and put out the eyes of Zedekiah and bound him in chains and took
him to Babylon.
8[†] e In the fifth month, on f the seventh day of the month—that was the
nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon—Nebuzaradan,
the captain of the bodyguard, a servant of the king of Babylon, came to
Jerusalem. 9 g And he burned the house of the LORD h and the king’s house
and all the houses of Jerusalem; every great house he burned down. 10And
all the army of the Chaldeans, who were with the captain of the guard,
i broke down the walls around Jerusalem. 11 j And the rest of the people who
were left in the city and the deserters who had deserted to the king of
Babylon, together with the rest of the multitude, Nebuzaradan the captain of
the guard carried into exile. 12But the captain of the guard left k some of the
poorest of the land to be vinedressers and plowmen.
13[†] l And the pillars m of bronze that were in the house of the LORD, and
n the stands and o the bronze sea that were in the house of the LORD, the
Chaldeans broke in pieces and carried the bronze to Babylon. 14 p And they
took away the pots and the shovels and the snuffers and the dishes for
incense and all the vessels of bronze used in the temple service, 15the fire
pans also and the bowls. What was of gold the captain of the guard took
away as gold, and what was of silver, as silver.
16As for the two pillars, the
one sea, and the stands that Solomon had made for the house of the LORD,
q the bronze of all these vessels was beyond weight. 17 r The height of the
one pillar was eighteen cubits, [1] and on it was a capital of bronze. The
height of the capital was three cubits. A latticework and pomegranates, all
of bronze, were all around the capital. And the second pillar had the same,
with the latticework.
18 s And the captain of the guard took t Seraiah the chief priest and
u Zephaniah the second priest and the three keepers of the threshold; 19and
from the city he took an officer who had been in command of the men of
war, and v five men of the king’s council who were found in the city; and
the secretary of the commander of the army, who mustered the people of the
land; and sixty men of the people of the land, who were found in the city.
20And Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them and brought them to
the king of Babylon at w Riblah. 21[†]And the king of Babylon struck them
down and put them to death at w Riblah in the land of Hamath. x So Judah
was taken into exile out of its land.
Gedaliah Made Governor of Judah
22[†]And over the people who remained in the land of Judah, whom
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, he appointed y Gedaliah the son
of z Ahikam, son of Shaphan, governor.
23 a Now when all the captains and
their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah governor,
they came with their men to Gedaliah at b Mizpah, namely, Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of
Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite.
24And Gedaliah swore to them and their men, saying, “Do not be afraid
because of the Chaldean officials. Live in the land and serve the king of
Babylon, and it shall be well with you.” 25 c But in the seventh month,
d Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, son of Elishama, of the royal family, came
with ten men and struck down Gedaliah and put him to death along with the
Jews and the Chaldeans who were with him at Mizpah. 26
e Then all the
people, both small and great, and the captains of the forces arose and went
to Egypt, for they were afraid of the Chaldeans.
Jehoiachin Released from Prison
27[†] f And in the thirty-seventh year of g the exile of Jehoiachin king of
Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, Evil-
merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, graciously
h freed [2] Jehoiachin king of Judah from prison. 28And he spoke kindly to
him and gave him a seat above the seats of the kings who were with him in
Babylon. 29So Jehoiachin put off his prison garments. And every day of his
life i he dined regularly at the king’s table, 30and for his allowance, a
regular allowance was given him by the king, according to his daily needs,
as long as he lived.
Study Notes for 2 Kings
1:1–18 The Death of Ahaziah. King Ahaziah, Ahab’s son, has been injured.
He wants to know whether he will live. Elijah obeys God and delivers a
message to the king.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 1:2 Samaria was the capital of the northern kingdom of
Israel from the time of Omri (1 Kings 16:24) until the fall of the northern
kingdom (2 Kings 17). Ekron was an important Philistine city about 25 miles
(40 km) west of Jerusalem. Baal-zebub means “lord of the flies.” It is probably
a deliberate misspelling of “Baal-zebul,” which means “Baal the exalted” or
“Baal, master of the dwelling” (see note on Matt. 10:25). This change
expresses the authors’ disrespect for this false god.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 1:3–4 In a scene similar to the opening verses of 1 Kings 19,
when Ahaziah sends messengers (2 Kings 1:2), the Lord responds by sending
an angel.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 1:8 He wore a garment of hair. Since the Hebrew word for
“hair” could refer to either animal or human hair, some translators have thought
it was describing Elijah as being long-haired or bearded.
FACT
Israel and Judah’s sins continue. Picking up where 1 Kings left off, Israel
and Judah continued to decline through false worship and disobedience.
They were led into sin by their kings, most of whom failed to follow the
Lord.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 1:9–12 a captain of fifty men with his fifty. . . . another . .
. with his fifty. A hundred soldiers die as a result of Ahaziah’s choice to turn
from God. The sins of leaders often lead to tragic consequences for those
whom they lead (see note on 2 Sam. 24:17).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 1:13–18 third captain. This man shows Elijah respect as a
prophet of the Lord. Ahaziah has his desired meeting with Elijah, but it
changes nothing: the king dies. His brother Jehoram succeeds him (v. 17; see
3:1). On the Chronicles of the Kings, see note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:1–10:36 Elisha and Israel. Elijah’s ministry has been
coming to a close since 1 Kings 19:15–18, where Elijah was told to anoint
Elisha as his successor. The war with Baal worship will not end until Elisha
has succeeded Elijah and Hazael and Jehu have appeared. Chapters 2–10 of
2 Kings tell of these events.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:1–25 In these verses, the prophetic responsibility passes
from Elijah to Elisha.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:1–4 It is not clear why the Lord sends Elijah from Gilgal
to Bethel, and then on to Jericho, but there are prophetic communities at all
three cities (vv. 3, 5; 4:38), and Elijah is probably their leader. (Later, Elisha
will be their leader.)
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:1 The idea of going up to heaven at the end of one’s
earthly life does not appear often in the OT (compare Gen. 5:24). More
common is the idea of “going down” to Sheol, the world of the dead (e.g., Job
7:9; see note on 1 Sam. 2:6). Other passages speak of the dead being “gathered
to their people” (e.g., Gen. 25:7–8; 1 Kings 2:10). This does not mean,
however, that OT believers had no hope for eternal life. Various passages
describe a hope for continuing fellowship with God after death (2 Kings 2:11;
Ps. 16:10–11; 17:15; 23:6; 115:17–18; Eccles. 12:7). In the NT, Jesus implied
that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were alive and in God’s presence (Matt. 22:32);
Moses and Elijah appeared talking with Jesus (Matt. 17:3); and the parable of
the rich man and Lazarus described Lazarus as being in Abraham’s presence
immediately after death (Luke 16:22–25).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:2 Bethel is identified with Jeroboam’s spiritual
unfaithfulness in 1 Kings 12–13. Please stay here. It is never made clear why
Elijah keeps trying to get Elisha to remain behind on the day when he is to
inherit Elijah’s prophetic ministry. It is probably a testing of Elisha’s
worthiness for the task.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:3–4 keep quiet. It is disrespectful for the prophets to
speak of Elijah’s death while he is still with them.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:3 The sons of the prophets are not their physical
descendants but groups of prophets usually affiliated with a more prominent
prophet (see 1 Sam. 19:20; 2 Kings 4:38; 6:1). They must have received special
revelations from God (see Deut. 18:18, 20; Jer. 14:14), though none of their
prophecies are recorded in Scripture.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:4–5 Jericho was in the Jordan Valley about 10 miles (16
km) northwest of the Dead Sea. It was the first city conquered by the Israelites
in Canaan.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:6–8 The Jordan River runs along a short stretch of a
geological fault that starts in the north in Syria and extends southward into
Africa. This miraculous crossing of the Jordan recalls Moses leading Israel
across the Red Sea (Ex. 14:15–31).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:9 Elisha asks Elijah to give him what an eldest son in
Israel would expect from his father: a double portion of the inheritance (see
Deut. 21:15–17). In this case, however, the inheritance is not land but spiritual
power.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:10 You have asked a hard thing. It is unclear how
Elisha’s request can be hard, since Elisha has been chosen by God to succeed
Elijah.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:11–13 chariots of fire and horses of fire. The divine
army, last seen waging war on Ahab (1 Kings 22:1–38), has come for Elijah.
Elisha took hold of his own clothes and tore them in two pieces. This is
perhaps part of a mourning ritual (compare Gen. 37:34; 2 Sam. 13:30–31), but
it also suggests leaving his old life behind, as he picks up the cloak of Elijah.
Compare 1 Kings 19:19–21, where Elijah threw his cloak upon Elisha to
symbolize his being called to be a prophet.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:14 the water was parted . . . and Elisha went over.
Elisha is Elijah’s true successor. Empowered by the Spirit, he is able to repeat
Elijah’s parting of the waters (v. 8).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:16 Please let them go and seek your master. The sons of
the prophets do not fully understand what has happened. They wonder whether
the Spirit of the LORD has simply caught Elijah up and cast him upon some
mountain or into some valley. They want to retrieve his body for burial.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:19–22 the water is bad, and the land is unfruitful.
Jericho was ideal for settlement because of a permanent spring which watered
the land around it. Now, however, the water supply had become contaminated.
(The city had been rebuilt under the shadow of Joshua’s curse; see Josh. 6:26; 1
Kings 16:34). The use of salt here is symbolic; the water was healed by
supernatural means: Thus says the LORD, I have healed this water.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 2:23–24 The city of Bethel played a key role in Israel’s
rebellion against God (see 1 Kings 12:25–13:34). It is no surprise, therefore, to
find young people from this city disrespecting a prophet of the Lord ( jeered at
him). baldhead. Elisha might have been naturally bald, or perhaps some
prophets shaved their heads. he cursed them. . . . And two she-bears . . . tore
forty-two of the boys. Though this judgment may at first seem harsh, the
group probably posed a physical threat to Elisha.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:1–27 Like Elijah before him, Elisha becomes involved in
politics. Here, he is consulted about a military campaign (compare 1 Kings
22:1–28).
FACT
Though bears no longer live in the region of Palestine, the bear God used to
punish the disrespectful boys (2:24) was probably of a type that could grow
up to 7 feet (2 m) tall and reach 500 pounds (227 kg).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:2 Although Jehoram allowed his people to worship Baal
(see v. 13; 9:22; 10:18–28), he himself did not worship Baal as did his father
and mother (that is, Ahab and Jezebel). Instead, he removed Baal’s pillar
from the temple (see 1 Kings 14:23).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:4–5 Mesha was a ninth-century B.C. king of Moab. He
began his reign under the authority of Israel and was required to give Israel a
percentage of his agricultural produce (lambs and wool). After Ahab’s death,
Mesha rebelled.
FACT
The Moabite Stone is a small monument inscribed with details about the
conflict between the Israelites and the Moabites (3:4–27). Written by the
Moabites, it emphasizes their victories over Israel. More importantly, it
features the earliest known reference to the Lord’s personal name (YHWH;
see note on Gen. 2:4) outside of the Bible.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:7–9 Confronted with the Moabite rebellion, Jehoram, like
his father Ahab before him, seeks help from Jehoshaphat, king of Judah.
Jehoshaphat responds to Jehoram just as he did to Ahab: I am as you are, my
people as your people, my horses as your horses (compare 1 Kings 22:4).
However, unlike on that earlier occasion, this time Jehoshaphat fails to seek the
Lord’s will (contrast 1 Kings 22:5). They plan to attack Moab from the south,
through the wilderness of Edom, rather than from the north. This is possible
because Edom is under Judean rule (1 Kings 22:47) and her king is
Jehoshaphat’s deputy rather than an independent monarch. The combined
armies get lost, however, caught in a circuitous march. Not surprisingly, a
military venture undertaken without prophetic advice faces disaster.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:11–14 Is there no prophet of the LORD here? Faced with
disaster, Jehoshaphat finally seeks divine guidance (compare 1 Kings 22:7).
They find Elisha, the one who poured water on the hands of Elijah (probably
a reference to Elisha’s having been Elijah’s servant).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:15–19 bring me a musician. Music plays a part in Elisha
receiving his message from God (compare 1 Sam. 10:5–11). The immediate
crisis (no water, 2 Kings 3:9) is to be dealt with by a miracle, as the nearby
streambed shall be filled with water from a mysterious source (neither wind
nor rain). God will give the alliance a complete victory over Moab. They will
attack every fortified city and every choice city, devastating the land as they
move through it. Deuteronomy 20:19–20 prohibits this kind of destruction in
normal cases, but here the Moabites as a nation are to be destroyed (see note on
Deut. 20:16–18), rather than simply conquered.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:20–24 Water mysteriously flows from the direction of
Edom. This fools the Moabites into thinking Israel and Judah have slaughtered
each other, because in the morning sunlight the water appears red as blood.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 3:27 Just as Israel seemed to have defeated him, Mesha
offered his son as burnt offering on the wall. As a consequence, there came
great wrath against Israel. This does not refer to divine anger. Instead, it
seems, Mesha’s troops respond to his desperate act with an anger against Israel
that carries them to victory against all the odds.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:1–44 Several more miracles by Elisha remind the reader of
the miracles performed by his predecessor, Elijah.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:1–7 the creditor has come to take my two children to be
his slaves (v. 1). In ancient Israel, indebtedness could lead to loss of property
and even the loss of one’s freedom (see Neh. 5:4–5). Persons and property
ending up in the hands of creditors could often be bought back by a “kinsman-
redeemer” (see Lev. 25:35–55; Ruth 4:1–12; Jer. 32:6–15). Apparently the
widow in this story lacks such a redeemer, so Elisha takes on that role for her.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:10 a small room on the roof. Roofs in ancient Israel were
typically flat and served as important areas in the life of the family (see Josh.
2:6–8; 2 Sam. 11:2; 2 Kings 23:12). Occasionally, they provided
accommodations for guests (see 1 Sam. 9:26; 2 Sam. 16:22). The structure
here, however, is more permanent (it has walls).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:13 a word spoken on your behalf. Elisha offers to help
the Shunammite woman secure benefits from government officials. She has no
need of their help, however, because she is wealthy (v. 8) and has the support
and protection of her own people.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:23 Her husband’s response implies that it was customary
in Israel to consult prophets only on particular days—the new moon and the
Sabbath (see 1 Sam. 20:5–34; Amos 8:5). This woman’s business, however,
will not wait. All is not really well, but she does not want either her husband or
Gehazi (2 Kings 4:26) getting in her way as she seeks Elisha’s help.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:27 the LORD has hidden it from me. Elisha did not know
this would happen. Prophets are not all-knowing. They depend always on
God’s revelation.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:29 Tie up your garment. As the woman had arrived at
Carmel in great haste (v. 24), Elisha sends Gehazi back to Shunem in similar
haste, his garment tied up so he can run (compare 1 Kings 18:46).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:30–31 I will not leave you. The woman does not accept
Elisha’s plan to resurrect the boy from a distance, by his staff. She wants his
personal attention, which in the end does prove crucial.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:34 Elisha’s actions vividly picture God restoring breath to
the child (putting his mouth on his mouth), as well as sight (his eyes) and
strength (his hands).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:38 A general state of famine does not imply a complete
absence of food (see, e.g., vv. 42–44).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:40–41 death in the pot. As with the salt thrown into the
water at Jericho (2:21), the flour is a visible sign of the Lord’s power working
through Elisha.
FACT
The wild gourds gathered by the prophet (4:38–41) were poisonous. The
prophet, of course, did not realize this. He added the gourds to the stew, “not
knowing what they were” (4:39).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 4:42–44 bread of the firstfruits. The second miracle of the
chapter also concerns provision for people who depend on Elisha. A limited
amount of food is multiplied (compare vv. 1–7). The God of Elisha heals,
provides, and brings life from death.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:1–27 The account of Elisha’s miracles continues with a
story that again recalls the ministry of Elijah: the Lord is God not only of
Israelites but also of foreigners (compare 1 Kings 17:17–24); he is, in fact, the
only true God (compare 1 Kings 18:20–40).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:1 the LORD had given victory to Syria. Israel’s God is
responsible for victory or defeat in battles, no matter which gods may be
worshiped by the victorious or defeated peoples (see Dan. 1:1–2). Naaman, by
whom God had given the Syrians victory on this occasion, was a leper. He
suffered from some skin disorder, though not necessarily what is known today
as “leprosy” (see note on Luke 5:12).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:5–7 a letter to the king of Israel. There is an uneasy truce
between Syria and Israel. There is sufficient tension, however, for Israel’s king
to be concerned that Syria’s king is seeking a quarrel by asking him to
perform a task (cure him of his leprosy) that only God can accomplish. The
tearing of clothes can indicate frustration, sorrow, or spiritual conviction (see
22:11–13). Ten talents of silver represents about 750 pounds (341 kg),
compared with 150 pounds (68 kg; six thousand shekels) of gold. He could
give a greater quantity of silver because of its lesser value, compared to gold.
FACT
Who was Rimmon? Rimmon was another name for the Syrian god Baal-
hadad. Known as the storm god, he was depicted as a bearded deity holding
a club and thunderbolt. He was considered the most powerful god in the
Syrian religion.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:9–12 stood at the door. Naaman clearly expects personal,
immediate attention from Elisha. However, Elisha addresses him only through
a messenger and sends him to wash in the Jordan. Moreover, Naaman was
looking for a cure, and Elisha apparently offers only ritual cleansing (wash . . .
be clean). He could have done this at home by bathing in the rivers of
Damascus.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:13 Has he actually said . . . ? Naaman’s servants have
been listening more carefully, for Elisha did not speak only of ritual cleansing
but of healing (“your flesh shall be restored,” v. 10).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:14–15 a little child. The “great man” (v. 1) had a problem,
to which the “little girl” (v. 2) had the solution. The solution involved
Naaman’s becoming, like her, “a little child.” He had to submit to the authority
of the prophet and acknowledge his new faith (I know that there is no God in
all the earth but in Israel).
ELISHA
Elisha was Elijah’s disciple and assistant and, eventually, his successor. He
served as a prophet for 55 years and became famous for the many miracles
he performed. Among these miracles was the healing of Naaman, the
commander of the Syrian army. Naaman was a leper and came to Israel
seeking to be healed. Elisha told him to wash in the Jordan River seven
times. At first, Naaman felt insulted by these simple instructions, but when
he finally obeyed, he was healed instantly. Elisha’s God-given power did not
end at his death. When a fallen soldier was thrown into Elisha’s grave, the
soldier came back to life as soon as his body came into contact with the
prophet’s bones (13:20–21). (2 Kings 5:8–14)
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:16 I will receive none. For Elisha to accept a gift would
have suggested that he had performed the miracle by his own power.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:17 two mule loads of earth. The earth is to be used to
construct a mud-brick altar (see Ex. 20:24–25) for Naaman’s worship of the
Lord.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:18 may the LORD pardon. Naaman’s dilemma is that he
will still be required by his official duties to attend the temple of Rimmon.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:20–22 I will run . . . and get something from him.
Gehazi tries to profit from the miracle (compare Joshua 7; Acts 8:18–24).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 5:26 Was it a time to accept . . . ? Just as kings can misuse
their power, so can the servants of prophets.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:1–23 With the healing of Naaman, Elisha has involved
himself with Syria for the first time. That involvement now occupies most of
the next two chapters, as the authors prepare the reader for the bloody events of
chs. 8–10.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:1–7 A member of the prophetic community loses a
borrowed axe head. Elisha, by the Lord’s power (2:14), miraculously makes
the iron float, so that it is found.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:8 the king of Syria was warring against Israel.
Relations between Syria and Israel have worsened since ch. 5.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:9 the man of God sent word. Elisha intervenes to help
Jehoram. Nothing has changed in Jehoram’s behavior (compare 3:2–3, 13), but
the time has not yet arrived for final judgment on this royal dynasty (see chs.
9–10).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:13 Dothan is only 10 miles (16 km) north of the capital
city of Samaria. The Syrians have been able to advance a long way into Israel.
But the Syrian king is deluded in thinking he can send and seize Elisha.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:16 those who are with us. Elisha knows that the Lord has
sent an army of angels to protect him.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:17 the mountain was full. Syrian troops may surround the
city (v. 15), but Elisha himself is supported all around by the army of the
Lord.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:18 blindness. Probably a dazed mental condition in which
the Syrians are open to suggestion and manipulation but still able to follow the
prophet to Samaria.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:19 I will bring you to the man whom you seek. The
statement is somewhat puzzling, but rather than leaving the Syrians, Elisha did
in fact bring them face to face with the man they were looking for.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:22 You shall not strike them down. Jehoram would not
kill men taken captive with your sword and with your bow, and these are
not even men like that. They are to be treated as guests.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:24–7:20 The uneasy peace of ch. 5 gave way in 6:8–23 to
occasional Syrian raids into Israelite territory. These were beginning to
decrease (6:23), but now there is a full-blown invasion.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:25 donkey’s head . . . dove’s dung. The siege was so
severe that Samaria’s inhabitants were reduced to eating valuable animals.
They also were eating parts of the animals they normally would not eat, and
they were purchasing them for high prices.
FACT
What is a siege? In ancient times, a “siege” occurred when an enemy army
surrounded a city and demanded that it surrender. If the city refused, the
invaders cut off food and water supplies and attempted to tear down the
city’s defensive walls. Cities usually surrendered when they ran out of water.
Those who fought to the end faced terrible consequences when their enemies
finally overwhelmed them (6:24–7:20; 17:5; 25:1–2).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:26–27 Help, my lord, O king. The plea is directed to the
king as the ultimate court of human justice, as in 1 Kings 3:16–28. Israel has
strayed a long way from that glorious era when a wise king could ensure
justice. The normal food supply is exhausted, and nothing comes from the
threshing floor (see note on 1 Kings 22:10–12) or winepress.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:28–29 Give your son. The Bible reports other cases of
cannibalism because of a long siege (e.g., Lam. 4:10; Ezek. 5:10).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:30–31 he tore his clothes. See notes on 2:11–13; 5:5–7.
Likewise, sackcloth symbolizes mourning and distress. Jehoram appears to
believe that removing Elisha will remove the problems he is facing.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 6:32 the elders were sitting with him. The elders of
Samaria are gathered together in Elisha’s house (compare the similar situation
in Ezek. 8:1; 20:1).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 7:1 a seah of fine flour . . . two seahs of barley. A seah is
about 7 quarts (7.7 liters). Rescue is coming, and normal business at the gate
of Samaria will be resumed on the following day (the prices are much lower
here than in 6:25).
FACT
A seah is a dry measurement equal to about 7 quarts or 7.7 liters.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 7:2 windows in heaven. This officer cannot imagine how
such an economic recovery could happen overnight. Will God hand out
material blessings (see Mal. 3:10)? To mock the prophetic word is to mock the
Lord himself, however, so he shall see it . . . but . . . not eat.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 7:3–4 four men who were lepers. Faced with certain death
if they enter the city or sit where they are, they instead choose possible death
in the camp of the Syrians.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 7:20 the people trampled him. The skeptical officer of v. 2
is trampled in the scramble to take the Syrians’ supplies, fulfilling Elisha’s
prophecy.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:1–6 After the long narrative about the siege of Samaria
(6:24–7:20), the Shunammite woman of 4:8–37 reappears. In 4:13, the woman
declined Elisha’s offer of help, saying that she could get help from her own
people. In 8:1–6, however, she is no longer with her own people, for she has
followed Elisha’s advice and avoided famine by going to live in Philistia.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:1 Elisha had said. The prophecy had been delivered
around the same time that Elisha restored the Shunammite woman’s son to life
(4:8–37), and the famine had followed soon after (see 4:38). This event is
different from the more severe famine in Samaria described in 6:24–7:20.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:2 The land of the Philistines was a natural place to seek
refuge during a famine in Israel (compare Gen. 26:1). It was also close to
Egypt, the breadbasket of the ancient world (e.g., Gen. 12:10; 47:4).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:3 her house and her land. Someone has taken the
woman’s property in her absence—perhaps Jehoram himself, showing the same
land-grabbing tendencies as his parents (see 1 Kings 21). In Israel the end of
the seventh year was a time for restoration of property and cancellation of debt
(Ex. 21:2–3; Deut. 15:1).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:6 all the produce. The king also provides her with all the
income from her land that she would have received had she stayed.
FACT
Was it Joram or Jehoram? At about the same time, Israel had a king named
Joram who was sometimes called Jehoram, while Judah had a king named
Jehoram who was sometimes called Joram. King Joram of Israel was a son
of Ahab while King Jehoram of Judah married a daughter of Ahab.
FACT
Kings, priests, and prophets were sometimes anointed with oil as a sign that
God had set them apart for a special purpose (see 1 Sam. 15:1; Lev. 8:30).
More commonly, oil was used in cooking and to clean and moisturize the
body (see Deut. 28:40; 2 Sam. 14:2).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:7–15 The house of Omri has now held the throne of Israel
since 1 Kings 16:23, and in spite of Elijah’s prophecy about its end (1 Kings
21:21–24), one now reads of Ahab’s second apostate son holding on to his
kingdom with the help of Elisha. Did Elijah sabotage God’s plan by failing to
anoint Hazael and Jehu (1 Kings 19:15–18)? The answer is no. Hazael is now
introduced, to be followed shortly by Jehu.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:8–9 meet the man of God. It appears to have been
customary when consulting prophets to offer some payment, in this case an
extravagant gift of forty camels’ loads of goods (see 1 Sam. 9:1–9; 1 Kings
14:1–4; 2 Kings 5:1–6). The messenger Hazael enters the narrative without
details of his background or role.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:10 say to him, “You shall certainly recover.
” Verses 11–
12 indicate that Elisha knows that whatever Hazael says, he intends to kill the
king.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:11 he fixed his gaze. The text does not identify “he” and
“him” in this verse. Most interpreters understand the first “he” to be Elisha,
who “fixed his gaze” on Hazael, staring at him but also seeing with prophetic
vision what Hazael would do in the future. Hazael does not know how to
respond and is embarrassed, and then Elisha weeps.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:15 Hazael became king. Hazael came to power in Syria
sometime between 845 B.C., when it is known that Ben-hadad was still on the
throne, and 841. He reigned for about 40 years and was one of Israel’s most
bitter enemies.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:16–29 Judah was last mentioned in ch. 3, when
Jehoshaphat was king of Judah. Another Judean king has come and gone in the
meantime, however, and the reader must be told about him and be introduced
to his successor in order to understand chs. 9–10.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:16 Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat. First introduced
briefly in 1 Kings 22:50, this king is mentioned again in 2 Kings 1:17. In 8:21,
23–24, his name appears as “Joram,” which is also the name of Israel’s king in
this period (v. 16). This Israelite king is himself called “Jehoram” in 1:17 and
3:1. At precisely the point when the southern monarchy has come to resemble
the northern monarchy most closely in its worship (see note on 8:18), their
kings are called by the same name. One must work hard to distinguish their
actions in the text.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:18 Jehoram walked in the way of the kings of Israel. His
father, Jehoshaphat, had made peace with the king of Israel (1 Kings 22:44).
From Jehoshaphat’s reign onward, the fortunes of the house of Omri and the
house of David were closely interconnected. Jehoram had married the
daughter of Ahab, and the two kingdoms followed a similar religious policy
(as the house of Ahab had done).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:19 he promised to give a lamp to him. See 1 Kings
11:36; 15:4. Sins in David’s family are to be punished with the “rod of men” (2
Sam. 7:14–16), not with the destruction of his dynasty.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:20–22 In his days Edom revolted. The punishment of
David’s house in this case (see note on v. 19) comes in Jehoram’s failure to
subdue a rebellion by Edom, a country ruled by a king appointed by Judah (1
Kings 22:47; see note on 2 Kings 3:7–9). A city within Judah was also
rebelling. Libnah was located southwest of Jerusalem (see also 2 Chron.
21:16–17).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:23 Chronicles of the Kings. See note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 8:28–29 war against Hazael king of Syria. Another joint
battle against the Syrians at Ramoth-gilead (see 1 Kings 22:1–4) is followed
by withdrawal to the stronghold of Jezreel, so that the Israelite king can
recover from his wounds. Ramoth-gilead is apparently back in Israelite hands
(2 Kings 9:14), perhaps abandoned in the general Syrian retreat in 7:3–7.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:1–10:17 First Kings 19:15–18 tells of three men whom
God would use to bring about the end of Baal worship in Israel. Two of those
men—Elisha and Hazael—have already appeared on the scene. This next
section tells the story of Jehu.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:1 Tie up your garments. See 1 Kings 18:46 and 2 Kings
4:29. Speed will be important for this messenger from among the sons of the
prophets (see note on 2:3). The army is still at Ramoth-gilead, even though
the king has withdrawn to Jezreel (8:29).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:2 Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi. Jehu was
described in 1 Kings 19:16 only as “son of Nimshi” (see also 2 Kings 9:20).
Nimshi is actually his grandfather rather than his father (who is not the Judean
king Jehoshaphat). It is unusual for the grandfather to be referred to in citations
of this kind. Perhaps Nimshi was a particularly well-known person.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:3 flask of oil. Elijah had been commanded to anoint Jehu
king over Israel (1 Kings 19:16), but had failed to do so. The reasons for
Elisha’s advice to the messenger to open the door and flee are not given. The
reference to Jehu’s reckless chariot driving (2 Kings 9:20) perhaps suggests
that he has a reputation for reckless behavior and could be dangerous to the
messenger.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:7 you shall strike down the house of Ahab. The
pronouncement the messenger delivered is much longer than the one Elisha
gave in v. 3 and the one Jehu later gave to his fellow officers (v. 12). The
authors probably shortened the other versions of the message to avoid
repetition.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:10 none shall bury her. It was considered a terrible thing
in Israel not to be given a proper burial (see Deut. 28:25–26; Jer. 16:4).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:13 they blew the trumpet and proclaimed, “Jehu is
king.
” The people’s eagerness to do this suggests that there was instability in
the army because of Jehoram’s lack of military success.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:17–20 I see a company. As Jehu approaches with his
army, the people in the city are not sure what is happening.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:22 Is it peace, Jehu? It seems unlikely that Jehoram and
Ahaziah would have left the safety of Jezreel to meet Jehu if they had doubted
Jehu’s peaceable intentions. The Hebrew phrase probably could be translated,
“Is all well?” What peace can there be? Jehu’s response is to ask how things
can be well in a kingdom dominated by the Baal religion and the whorings of
Joram’s mother Jezebel.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:25–26 plot of ground belonging to Naboth the
Jezreelite. See note on 1 Kings 21:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:27–28 he fled to Megiddo and died there. Linked with
Ahab in marriage and practicing the same idol worship, Ahaziah also shares in
his fate. He is shot . . . in the chariot, later to be transported dead to his capital
city for burial.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:30 she painted her eyes and adorned her head. Jezebel
met her end proudly, dressed up as a queen should be.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:31 Jezebel sarcastically compares Jehu to a previous king,
Zimri, whose reign lasted only seven days (1 Kings 16:8–20). She implies that
Jehu will not survive his own revolution.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:32 Kings in ancient times often hired eunuchs (castrated
males) to guard their harems. This assured the king that the males close to his
women were not capable of sexual relations with them. Eunuchs also served as
cooks, scribes, ambassadors, and in administrative roles.
FACT
Eunuchs had many roles in the ancient world. They served in the royal court
as cooks, scribes, guards of the harem, and ambassadors. The Hebrew word
for “eunuch” usually refers to a castrated man, though it does not always do
so (see Gen. 39:1).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 9:36 the word of the LORD, which he spoke by his servant
Elijah. Elijah earlier prophesied the gruesome death of Jezebel (1 Kings
21:23). dogs shall eat. Leaving Jezebel’s corpse to devouring dogs meant
disgrace, since burial was now impossible.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:1 Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. Jehu now
prepares to fulfill Elijah’s prophecy of “cutting off” all the males of Ahab’s
house (1 Kings 21:21–22).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:3 fight for your master’s house. By writing letters to the
leading citizens and challenging them to place one of Ahab’s potential heirs on
his father’s throne, Jehu forces them to choose sides.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:5 he who was over the palace . . . he who was over the
city. These are the “rulers of the city” mentioned in v. 1. The joint reply of
these two officials along with the elders and the other former Ahab loyalists
(the “guardians”) reveals that they are now Jehu’s servants.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:7 they took the king’s sons and slaughtered them. This
fulfills the word of the Lord in 9:7–9 and is similar to other situations in which
entire groups of people are put to death (see note on 2 Sam. 21:3–6). Such
drastic action against a royal household was not uncommon in the ancient
world. The number seventy in such contexts may be a round number, or purely
figurative, rather than an exact number.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:8–10 two heaps at the entrance of the gate. Jehu’s aim
is to convince the people to make him king. He knows the people struck down
all these, but he also tells them the LORD was carrying out his judgment on
Ahab’s house through them.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:12–14 His work in Jezreel complete, Jehu leaves for
Samaria. On the way, he encounters some relatives of Ahaziah king of Judah.
The Judean royal family keeps being drawn into Jehu’s destruction of the house
of Ahab, with whom they have been allied (see 9:27 for the death of Ahaziah).
they took them alive and slaughtered them. Jehu is thorough in
exterminating all traces of the past.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:15 Is your heart true to my heart as mine is to yours?
The chapter’s theme is “who is on the Lord’s side; who is in the right?”
Jehonadab, who is on the right side, reappears in Jeremiah 35 (“Jonadab”) as
the founder of a purist religious group committed to Israel’s older ways.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:18–27 Jehu assembled all the people. Jehu now gives
his attention to Samaria, which had been the focal point for the Baal cult (see 1
Kings 16:32–33). He assembled all the prophets and worshipers of Baal by
pretending that he himself wanted to worship their false god. Once every single
worshiper had come together, Jehu killed them all.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:20 Sanctify a solemn assembly. This phrase is probably
a Canaanite religious term.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:27 demolished the pillar of Baal . . . the house of Baal.
See 1 Kings 16:32–33; 2 Kings 3:2. Baal worship in Israel is officially at an
end.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:29 did not turn aside from the sins of Jeroboam. Jehu
has dealt with Baal worship, but he does nothing at all about the golden calves
. . . in Bethel and in Dan that Jeroboam installed after leading Israel in revolt
against the house of David (1 Kings 12:25–30).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:30 Since Jehu does not destroy the golden calves in
Bethel and Dan (v. 29; see v. 31), it is surprising to find him described as
someone who has carried out what is right in the eyes of the Lord. He also
receives the promise of a dynasty, though it will not be an eternal dynasty like
David’s (it will last only till the fourth generation). Evidently what Jehu has
done right (stopping Baal worship) far outweighs what he continues to do
wrong.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 10:32–33 the LORD began to cut off parts of Israel. First
Kings 19:15–18 pointed to a time when God’s judgment would fall on Israel
because of Baal worship. These verses focus on the part that the Syrian king
Hazael played in this judgment. Hazael conquered the area east of the Jordan as
far south as the Valley of the Arnon, which was the southern limit of Israelite
Transjordanian territory (see Josh. 12:2). This military success occurred during
a time when Syria was itself free from any threats by its own northern
neighbor, Assyria.
JEHU
Jehu was an army commander who became king of Israel. He was famous
for his reckless driving (9:20) but also for his great zeal for the Lord. He set
out to destroy every trace of Baal worship in Israel. He killed the kings of
both Israel and Judah, and then the entire household of Ahab. He killed the
wicked queen Jezebel and then all Ahab’s sons, royal officials, and priests.
Jehu then brought together all the followers of Baal by pretending that he
himself wanted to worship their false god. Once all the Baal worshipers had
assembled, Jehu killed them all. He destroyed the temple of Baal, turning it
into a latrine. Sadly, though God used Jehu to completely eradicate Baal
worship in Israel, he continued to worship the golden calves that Jeroboam
had set up. (2 Kings 10:28–31)
Syria Captures Gilead
c. 825–798 B.C.
The Syrians under Hazael continued to plague Israel during Jehu’ s reign, eventually capturing all of
Gilead from Aroer on the Arnon River to Bashan in the north. Later during the reign of Jehoash (also
called Joash), Hazael attacked Gath on the western border of Judah, and Jehoash sent Hazael treasures
from the temple of the Lord to persuade him to withdraw from attacking Jerusalem.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:1–12:21 Joash. The destruction of the house of Ahab has
greatly affected the house of David: Ahaziah (of Judah) has been killed, just
like Jehoram (of Israel), and a number of Ahaziah’s relatives have suffered the
same fate as Ahab’s relatives (10:12–14). Have the two houses become so
identified in intermarriage (8:18, 27) that there is no longer any difference
between them? Chapters 11–12 show that in fact the difference remains, for
David’s house survives even the assault of the wicked Queen Athaliah, a
Judean “Jezebel.”
FACT
Jehu pays tribute. Archaeologists have found a stone carving that shows
King Jehu of Israel paying tribute to Shalmaneser III, king of Assyria.
Known as the Black Obelisk, it depicts Jehu bowing to the ground in front of
Shalmaneser.
FACT
Joash (or Jehoash) became King of Judah at the age of seven. Joash listened
to the godly instruction of Jehoiada the priest and obeyed the Lord. But after
Jehoiada died, Joash took advice from idolaters and forgot the Lord.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:1–3 Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah may have been a
daughter of Jezebel (8:26); she is certainly as evil. The nurse’s willingness to
endanger herself by saving the child Joash contrasts sharply with the cowardly
leading men of Samaria in 10:1–7. See note on 2 Chron. 22:10–12.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:5–8 This is the thing that you shall do. The palace
guards are reassigned to provide security so that Joash can be crowned without
interference by Athaliah.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:10 spears and shields that had been King David’s. The
commanders are making it clear that they have allied themselves with David’s
cause. At the same time, the armor they are receiving can be passed on to the
new king as symbols of his royal power.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:12 the testimony. Joash is presented with a list of
divinely ordained laws. For kings ruling under divine law, see Deut. 17:18–20;
1 Kings 2:3; 2 Kings 23:3.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:14 The emphasis on custom is important, as the authors
try to show that Joash is the rightful heir to the throne. The coronation takes
place according to law and custom, and in full view of the people of the land.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:17 Jehoiada. See notes on 2 Chron. 23:1–24:27; 23:3.
The king and people once more identify themselves as the LORD’s people
(compare Josh. 24:1–27; 2 Kings 23:1–3). At the same time, a covenant is
made between the king and the people (compare 2 Sam. 5:1–3). After several
years of bad leadership, they are redefining kingship in distinctively Israelite
terms.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 11:21 Joash, introduced by that name in v. 2, will be called
Jehoash throughout most of ch. 12. He will be called Joash again only in
12:19, where his death is reported. See also note on 13:9.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 12:2–3 Jehoash (that is, Joash; see note on 11:21) did what
was right. He was a relatively good king who rejected idolatrous worship, but
the high places were not taken away (see note on 1 Kings 3:2; see also 1
Kings 15:14; 22:43).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 12:4–5 repair the house. There were three sources of
income for the repairs. Two of these were from regular temple income:
payments from the census of male Israelites (money for which each man is
assessed; Ex. 30:11–16), and monetary equivalents for things dedicated to God
(money from the assessment of persons; Lev. 27:1–25). The third source of
income, money that a man’s heart prompts him to bring, refers to a special
fund-raising campaign.
JOASH
Joash (also spelled Jehoash) was just an infant when his father, King
Ahaziah of Judah, was murdered. Following the king’s death, Joash’s wicked
grandmother Athaliah tried to kill everyone in the royal family so that she
could claim the throne. Joash was spared when his aunt, Jehosheba, hid him
in the temple. When Joash was seven years old, Jehoiada, the chief priest,
revealed that the young boy was alive. Joash was proclaimed king, and
Athaliah was put to death. Joash was a good king as long as Jehoiada was
there to guide him. Probably his greatest achievement was making some
much-needed repairs to the temple. After Jehoiada died, however, Joash
listened to ungodly advice and disobeyed the Lord. His life ended tragically
as he was murdered by his own men. (2 Kings 12:1–3)
FACT
Hazael (12:17) was king of Syria from 843–796 B.C. He threatened Israel
during the reigns of Jehu (1 Kings 19:17), Joram (8:28), and Jehoahaz
(13:22).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 12:7–12 Joash’s initial plan is to leave the fundraising to the
priests (vv. 4–5). But apparently the priests are not eager to spend good money
on buildings. Therefore Joash takes control of the project, ensuring that the
income goes directly to the workmen appointed to supervise the work.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 12:13 But there were not made . . . any vessels of gold, or
of silver. After all his efforts, Joash was able to achieve only a very humble
restoration of the temple.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 12:17–18 Judah, like Israel (10:32–33), is oppressed by
Hazael king of Syria. In fact, Joash had to empty the treasuries of the house
of the LORD and of the king’s house. Long past are the days when the king of
Israel had “rest on every side” (1 Kings 5:4). Much later, Hag. 2:7–8 foretold
that one day the nations would bring their wealth to the temple.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 12:19 Chronicles of the Kings. See note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 12:20 Silla was probably a neighborhood of Jerusalem
below “the Millo” (see note on 2 Sam. 5:9). The house of Millo was perhaps a
prominent building in the Millo.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:1–25 Jehoahaz and Jehoash. The story goes back to
the northern kingdom, Israel, and focuses on the two northern kings who
ruled during Joash of Judah’s lifetime.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:1–5 Jehoahaz the son of Jehu. . . . did what was evil,
and therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel. However,
because of God’s promise to Jehu (10:30), his anger is expressed only as
oppression of Israel by Syria.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:4–5 Jehoahaz sought the favor of the LORD. The
language throughout vv. 3–5 recalls the book of Judges. When Israel cried out
under foreign oppression, God sent a savior (v. 5; compare Judg. 3:9, 15).
Likely the “savior” here is Assyria, which began military actions against Syria
and Palestine in the closing years of the ninth century B.C. Since Syria needed
to defend itself against Assyria, it left Israel alone.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:6 the Asherah . . . remained in Samaria. On Asherim,
see note on 1 Kings 14:15. The English translation here implies that this is the
same Asherah that Ahab made earlier (1 Kings 16:33). It seems to have
survived Jehu’s reformation.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:7–8 dust at threshing. See note on 1 Kings 22:10–12.
The army of Jehoahaz is reduced to a small number, as insubstantial as chaff in
the breeze. On the Chronicles of the Kings, see note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:9 The next king of Israel, introduced here as Joash, is
referred to as both Joash (e.g., v. 14) and Jehoash (v. 25) throughout the rest of
this chapter and in ch. 14 (e.g., 14:8–9). He is not to be confused with Joash of
Judah; see note on 11:21.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:14–19 Joash (Jehoash of Israel) weeps because he thinks
he is on the verge of defeat, lacking chariots and horsemen (v. 7). Elisha
promises the king a series of victories (three times, v. 19). The victories would
have been greater in number had the king been more enthusiastically obedient
(“You should have struck five or six times”) to the prophet’s words. Aphek
lay eastward of the main Israelite territory in Transjordan. This is the direction
in which Jehoash shoots the arrow and from which the Syrian threat to Israel
typically came.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:20–21 grave of Elisha. Tombs in ancient Israel were
often dug out of soft rock or located in caves (e.g., Genesis 23). They were not
difficult to access. Israel needs to know that Elisha’s powers to resurrect live on
(compare 2 Kings 4:8–37), because just as this man was thrown into the grave
of Elisha, so God will soon “throw” Israel into exile in Assyria (17:20). The
Israelites need to maintain contact with the great prophets of the past through
obedience to their teachings, so that their “death” in exile can be followed by
resurrection (see Ezek. 37:1–14).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:23–25 Israel is surviving because of God’s promise to
Jehu (10:30), and also because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. That is why he kept the Syrians at bay during the reign of Jehoahaz, in
spite of Israel’s sin; and that is why the equally sinful Jehoash was later able to
lead Israel to something of a recovery. Even until now (that is, after the exile,
when the authors are writing), Israel remains in God’s presence.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 13:25 Three times Joash (that is, Jehoash; see note on v. 9)
defeated him, fulfilling Elisha’s prophecy (v. 19).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:1–15:7 Amaziah, Jeroboam II, and Azariah. The
recovery that began under Jehoash (see note on 13:23–25) continues into ch.
14. The house of Jehu brings Israel relief from Syria to the north and also
from a hostile Judah to the south.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:1–6 Amaziah was a relatively good king of Judah (he did
what was right in the eyes of the LORD). Like others before him, he failed to
remove the high places (see note on 1 Kings 3:2), but he basically kept the
Law of Moses. Yet the Judean kings from Joash to Jotham are regarded as not
like David (contrast 1 Kings 3:3; 22:43 with 2 Kings 14:3; 15:3). There is
some doubt in the authors’ minds about the wholeheartedness of these kings’
commitment to the Lord.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:7 struck down ten thousand Edomites. Edom had
revolted against Judean rule during Jehoram’s reign (8:20–22). Amaziah does
not reestablish Judean control over Edom, but this important victory does
improve Judah’s ability to trade (see note on 14:22).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:9–10 A thistle . . . sent to a cedar. Emboldened by the
success of his Edomite campaign (v. 7), Amaziah of Judah has decided to
confront the more powerful Jehoash of Israel. Jehoash responds with this insult
as a warning.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:11–14 Beth-shemesh. This town on the northwest border
of Judah, about 20 miles (32 km) by road from Jerusalem, guarded an
important pass from the Philistine plain. Judah’s defeat here led inevitably to
an assault on Jerusalem itself and the destruction of about 600 feet (183 m) of
the city wall on the northern side.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:15–17 the rest of the acts of Jehoash. The information
about Jehoash’s death is repeated from 13:12–13 (where he is called Joash).
This may have been to contrast his death with that of Amaziah (see 14:19). It is
also possible that Jehoash is highlighted here because he, as king of Israel, was
essentially also the ruler of Judah in this period, as was his son Jeroboam after
him. Amaziah is not said to have “ruled” in Judah after Jehoash’s death but
merely to have lived fifteen years there. On the Chronicles of the Kings, see
note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:19 they made a conspiracy against him. Amaziah was
bound to be unpopular since Jerusalem was invaded during his failed military
action (vv. 11–14). Lachish was the most important fortified city in Judah
besides Jerusalem. It defended one of the east-west valleys that gave access to
the Judean Plateau and Jerusalem from the coastal plains.
Resurgence during the Time of Azariah and Jeroboam II
c. 767–753 B.C.
A power vacuum created by Assyria’ s attack and withdrawal from Syria allowed Jeroboam II of Israel
and Azariah (also called Uzziah) of Judah to recover land that had once belonged to their kingdoms.
Jeroboam recovered much of Gilead, and Azariah recovered Elath on the Red Sea. Jeroboam also
subdued much of Syria’ s territory for a time, and Azariah captured some Philistine towns and fought
against the Arabians at Gurbaal and the Meunites.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:22 Azariah, the next king of Judah, strengthened
Amaziah’s gains in Edom by claiming the port of Elath at the north end of the
Gulf of Aqaba (the Red Sea). (But see 16:6 and note.) This town was closely
associated with Ezion-geber and the worldwide trade of Solomon’s day (1
Kings 9:26). It stood at the southern end of the great King’s Highway that ran
all the way north to Damascus.
FACT
Elath (14:22) was a strategic seaport on the northernmost tip of the Red Sea.
It was located at the southern end of the King’s Highway, which ran north all
the way to Damascus.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:25 The Assyrian assault on the area north of Israel had
seriously weakened the kingdoms of that region, including Syria. This had
allowed Jehoash to recapture some Israelite towns from the Syrians (13:25). In
the next few years, the Assyrian kings only occasionally ventured out on
military campaigns to their west. This allowed Jeroboam II of Israel, son of
Jehoash, to continue the Israelite recovery begun by his father. In fact, he
restored the border of northern Israel to the size it had been during Solomon’s
reign (1 Kings 8:65). Jonah the son of Amittai, whose story is told in the book
of Jonah, had prophesied that Jeroboam would accomplish this.
Prophets of Israel and Judah
c. 875–430 B.C.
Prophets had been a part of Israelite society since the days of Moses, but the complex political, religious,
and social situations of the divided monarchy made their role of communicating God’ s clear message
even more pronounced. Unlike priests, prophets did not inherit their role by birth and often were not part
of the religious establishment. They arose from various parts of Israel and Judah, with some having direct
access to the king (e.g., Elijah and Elisha) and others communicating their messages directly to the
people (e.g., Amos and Nahum).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:27 To blot out the name of Israel from under heaven
would be to destroy Israel completely (see Deut. 9:14–19), making forgiveness
and restoration impossible (see Deut. 29:20).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 14:28 Judah in Israel. This phrase reflects the unusual
situation during the reigns of Jehoash and Jeroboam II, when the kings of Israel
apparently controlled Judah as well (see note on vv. 15–17). During this time
territory is being restored (see v. 22) to both the north and the south. Jeroboam
II ruled Israel 40 years, from 786 to 746 B.C.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:3–4 he did what was right [but] the high places were
not taken away. See 14:3–4 for a similar description of Azariah’s father,
Amaziah. Azariah is also called Uzziah in various places (see 15:13, 30, 32,
34). It was during Azariah’s (Uzziah’s) reign that Isaiah began his prophetic
ministry (Isa. 1:1; 6:1).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:5 a leper to the day of his death. Sometime during his
reign, Azariah became a leper and was unable to govern. He occupied a
separate house, which is a symbolic way of saying that he was relieved of his
responsibilities. He was regarded as essentially dead. See note on 2 Chron.
26:21–23. Azariah’s son Jotham governed Judah in his place.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:6 On the Chronicles of the Kings, see note on 1 Kings
14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:8–31 Israel’ s Last Days. The Lord had promised Jehu
that his descendants would reign after him to the “fourth generation” (10:30).
With the death of Jeroboam II and the coming of Zechariah to the throne, that
fourth generation has arrived. Israel will now return to the unstable government
of the days before the dynasties of Omri and Jehu (see 1 Kings 14–16). King
will now follow king in quick succession.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:16–22 Menahem sacked Tiphsah. This attack on an
important city on the Euphrates River is the last, brutal action of an Israelite
king claiming control of a Solomon-like empire (compare 1 Kings 4:24). Such
a campaign would probably have taken place early in Menahem’s reign. It
probably happened either before the campaigns of Pul the king of Assyria in
743–740 B.C. began, or during these years as part of the anti-Assyrian struggle
in the region. “Pul” is a short name for Tiglath-pileser III. Pul’s goal was
apparently to establish an Assyrian trading center on the border with Egypt,
and he needed to control the area north of Egypt in order to achieve that goal.
Menahem’s tributary payment of a thousand talents of silver makes him
Assyria’s friend for the time being.
The Resurgence of Assyrian Influence
c. 740 B.C.
Looming over most of the latter history of the divided monarchy is the growing power and influence of
Assyria. The resurgence of this ancient empire dominated much of the politics of the ancient Near East
from the time of Jeroboam and Azariah until the empire’ s demise at the end of the seventh century B.C.
Israel bore the brunt of Assyria’ s forays into Palestine, though Judah experienced its share of attacks as
well. Assyria would eventually engulf nearly the entire Near East from Ur to Ararat to Egypt.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:27–31 Pekah is the last of the Israelite kings to rule
during the long reign of Azariah in Judah. Toward the end of Pekah’s reign, in
733–732 B.C., Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria takes much of Israel’s northern
and eastern territory. He deports much of Israel’s population in order to
increase the Assyrian labor force and reduce opposition among conquered
peoples. See note on 16:7–9.
FACT
Menahem’s tax receipts? Archaeologists working at the site of Samaria have
discovered 63 shards of pottery, dating to about the time of King Menahem,
on which tax payments are noted. These may be a record of the additional
tax payments Menahem imposed on Israel to pay off the Assyrian king
(15:19–20).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:32–16:20 Jotham and Ahaz. The house of David has
seen three of its last four kings assassinated, and the fourth relinquish his
power because of his leprosy. Things are not about to improve, as Jotham
and his unbelieving son Ahaz are introduced.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:34–35 the high places were not removed. See note on 1
Kings 3:2. Jotham was a relatively good king. Nevertheless, he is described as
being like his father Uzziah rather than like David (see note on 2 Kings 14:1–
6). He failed to encourage the people to worship in Jerusalem. Rather, he
allowed them to continue worshiping at the high places. Micah’s prophetic
ministry began during Jotham’s reign (Mic. 1:1).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 15:37 the LORD began to send Rezin the king of Syria
and Pekah . . . against Judah. This is the beginning of the “Syro-Ephraimite
War” described in Isaiah 7–9. As Syria and Israel (Ephraim) threaten Judah,
Judah will look to Assyria for help.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 16:1–4 he did not do what was right. Under Jotham’s son
Ahaz, Judah returns to officially sanctioned idolatry. The high places become
centers of Canaanite religion (see 1 Kings 14:23–24), which includes child
sacrifice (see 1 Kings 16:34).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 16:6 Rezin . . . recovered Elath for Syria. This town had
only recently been won back for Judah by Azariah (14:22). Rezin briefly
reestablishes Syrian control and then surrenders Elath to the Edomites. It
appears the Edomites are allies with the Philistines in the assault on Judah (2
Chron. 28:17–18).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 16:7–9 I am your servant. Rather than turning to the Lord
for help, Ahaz agrees to be ruled by Assyria. Ahaz asks for Assyria’s help,
which arrives in the form of the Assyrian campaigns of 733–732 B.C. in Syria-
Palestine. (See 15:27–31 and note.) Kir was the original home of the people of
Syria (Amos 9:7), somewhere in Mesopotamia.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 16:10–16 Ahaz travels to Damascus to meet his new
Assyrian overlord (see note on vv. 7–9). Ahaz is so impressed by a pagan altar
he sees in Damascus that he has a copy of it set up in Jerusalem. Ahaz’s
religion is a full-fledged mixing of the Israelite true religion with the pagan
religions of the other nations, including divination (the interpretation of
omens). The practice is forbidden in Deut. 18:10.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 16:17–18 cut off the frames . . . took down the sea. See 1
Kings 7:23–36. Ahaz desecrates the furnishings of the temple in order not to
offend his new master, Tiglath-pileser (because of the king of Assyria).
Obedience to the Lord is gone, and therefore the Lord’s blessing and protection
are gone.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 16:19 Chronicles of the Kings. See note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 17:1–41 The End of Israel. The authors describe the
uprooting and scattering of Israel, which was prophesied long before (1
Kings 14:15) but was delayed because of God’s promises and his
graciousness (2 Kings 10:30; 13:1–25; 14:23–29).
The Fall of Samaria and Deportation of Israelites
722 B.C.
During the reign of Hoshea of Israel, Shalmaneser of Assyria attacked Israel and made it a vassal
kingdom. Later, however, Hoshea conspired against Assyria, refusing to pay the tribute and appealing to
Egypt for help, so the Assyrians came and besieged Samaria until it fell. Many Israelites were exiled far
from Israel to the area near Gozan and the cities of the Medes, and foreign peoples from other parts of
the empire were relocated to Israel in an effort to prevent revolt. This signaled the end of the northern
kingdom of Israel.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 17:1–2 Hoshea was the last king over what remained of
northern Israel after the Assyrian assault of 732 B.C. (15:27–31). He was evil . .
. , yet not as the kings of Israel who were before him.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 17:3–4 he had sent messengers to So, king of Egypt.
Hoshea was a vassal to Shalmaneser V (727–722 B.C.), Tiglath-pileser’s
successor as king of Assyria. When Hoshea later tried to establish a
relationship with Egypt instead, the Assyrian king became angry.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 17:6 the king of Assyria captured Samaria. Samaria fell
after a three-year siege. Shalmaneser is identified as the conqueror, c. 722 B.C.
(see also 18:9–10). This agrees with the Babylonian Chronicle, but
Shalmaneser’s successor Sargon II (722–705 B.C.) claims this honor for himself
in his inscriptions. The places of exile mentioned in this verse are scattered
widely over the Assyrian Empire.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 17:7–23 this occurred because the people of Israel had
sinned (v. 7). The authors of 1–2 Kings give only this simple explanation for
the end of the northern kingdom. The remainder of these verses give the
details. Interestingly, some of the sins listed are those of Judah.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 17:24–41 the king of Assyria brought people . . . and
placed them in the cities of Samaria. Having sent the Israelites into exile, the
Assyrians bring people from other nations to resettle the land. These new
inhabitants of Israel thought they could worship the God of Israel while also
serving their own gods (vv. 33, 40–41). But because he is the only God who
truly exists, the Lord will not allow the worship of any false god (vv. 34–39).
FACT
Why were the Israelites deported? The Babylonians had learned that
destroying an enemy’s land but allowing them to remain in it was a bad idea.
It ruined potential crop resources and gave an opportunity for the conquered
people to regroup and rebel. Instead, they deported the conquered people to
other lands, and brought in people from other places to live in the conquered
territory. This mixing of ethnic groups made any organized rebellion less
likely.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:1–20:21 Hezekiah. In 715 B.C., seven years after the
fall of the northern kingdom of Israel, Hezekiah comes to the throne in
Judah. He resembles David more closely than any other king so far. He will
succeed in reforming Judean worship. Hezekiah’s trust in God will be
vindicated when, in 701, the Assyrians fail to conquer Jerusalem.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:4 He removed the high places. This is significant
because even the most faithful of Judean kings prior to Hezekiah had failed to
do this (e.g., 1 Kings 3:2; 15:14; 22:43). Hezekiah takes further action against
the bronze serpent named Nehushtan, which Moses had made in the
wilderness (Num. 21:4–9). It had recently become an object of worship.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:5–6 He trusted in the LORD. Hezekiah’s trust was
unparalleled in Judean history (there was none like him). This could be seen
in the way he held fast to God throughout his life (see Deut. 13:4; 30:20).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:7–8 Because of Hezekiah’s faithfulness, the LORD was
with him in his military exploits (compare 1 Sam. 16:18; 18:12, 14; 2 Sam.
5:10).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:9–12 Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against
Samaria. The verses repeat the story of how the northern kingdom fell (see
17:1–6). This reminds readers of the context of religious apostasy in which
Hezekiah pursued his bold policy of rebellion against Assyria.
HEZEKIAH
Hezekiah was king of the southern kingdom, Judah, at the time when the
Assyrians defeated the northern kingdom of Israel. Hezekiah was a good
king who followed God throughout his life. He began his reign by
completely reforming Judean worship. He removed the high places and all
the idols that previous kings had allowed. At one point Hezekiah became
very sick and was at the point of death, so he prayed that the Lord would
heal him. God honored his prayer, promising to give him another 15 years of
life. He also delivered Hezekiah and Jerusalem from the Assyrians. Hezekiah
resembled King David more closely than any other Davidic king thus far. He
is listed in the genealogy of Jesus (Matt. 1:9–10). (2 Kings 18:3–8)
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:13 Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all
the fortified cities of Judah. After Sargon II’s death, the new Assyrian king
Sennacherib (704–681 B.C.) first fought in southern Mesopotamia (703–702)
against the king of Babylon (see 20:12). He then turned his attention to Syria-
Palestine in 701. The rebellion there quickly collapsed. Hezekiah did not have
effective allies or fortresses.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:14–16 I have done wrong. Hezekiah’s first response to
the crisis is to bargain with Sennacherib. He went on to give him all the silver
from the temple, and stripped the gold from its doors (compare note on
12:17–18).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:17 While attacking Lachish, Sennacherib decides not to
accept Hezekiah’s attempt to persuade him to withdraw (vv. 14–16). Instead,
Sennacherib sends an army to Jerusalem to pressure Hezekiah to surrender. The
Tartan and Rab-saris were military officers. The Rabshakeh, or “chief
cupbearer,” would have accompanied the emperor as a personal attendant. His
presence in this group is due to his linguistic abilities (vv. 19, 26). The conduit
of the upper pool was just outside the city wall. It is the place where Isaiah
had earlier encouraged Ahaz to have faith (Isa. 7:1–9).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:18 over the household . . . the secretary . . . the
recorder. Three of the most important Judean officials go out to negotiate with
the three Assyrian officials.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:19–25 Sennacherib’s men claim that Egypt will not help
Hezekiah. They also claim that trust in the LORD is useless, because the Lord
is angry with Hezekiah for removing the high places and altars! Furthermore,
they say, it is the Lord himself who has sent Assyria to destroy Judah because
of this! The speech is obviously propaganda, and is not at all true.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:26–28 Please speak to your servants in Aramaic.
Aramaic was the language of the Assyrian Empire west of the Euphrates. The
educated Judean royal officials would have understood it, but the ordinary
people on the city wall would not. However, the Assyrians were trying to
appeal to the listening people, so they ignored the request and continued to
speak in Hebrew (the language of Judah).
FACT
“Please speak in Aramaic.” As Assyria tried to conquer Judah, they sent a
delegation to Jerusalem to engage in “psychological warfare” (18:17–37).
They made public proclamations intended to turn the Judeans against their
king. The Judean officials begged the Assyrians to speak only in Aramaic (v.
26), which these officials would have understood but which the ordinary
bystanders did not understand. But the Assyrians went on speaking in
Hebrew, seeking to demoralize all those who were listening.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:29–30 The Rabshakeh says that trust in the Lord will not
save the people of Judah. The reader is prepared to see God justify that trust.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 18:31–35 eat of his own vine . . . his own fig tree . . . drink
the water of his own cistern. The Assyrian king is presented as a powerful
god able to provide for his worshipers, in contrast to the supposedly weak God
of Israel, who is unable to deliver. The language of the false promise recalls
Deut. 8:7–9.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:1–2 he tore his clothes. A sign of deep emotion (see note
on 5:5–7).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:3–4 there is no strength. It is a day of great humiliation
and powerlessness. The only hope for this remnant is that the Lord, who is
truly the living God and not simply one false god among many, will act to
defend his name (see vv. 30–31).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:7–9 I will put a spirit in him. According to the prophet
Isaiah (see vv. 2, 5–6), the Lord will influence Sennacherib’s thinking so that
several events will occur. However, the timing of these events is not clear.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:10–13 Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive
you. In 18:19–35 the Rabshakeh claimed that Hezekiah was deceiving the
people about what would happen if they trusted the Lord (18:29–30); here he
claims that Hezekiah is the one deceived by the God in whom he trusts.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:20–28 A second prophecy from Isaiah (compare vv. 6–
7), in three parts, brings God’s response to Hezekiah’s prayer. This king has
been wrong to think that his military victories have resulted from his own
strength. In reality, it was the Lord who determined it long ago. Assyria is
merely the instrument of God’s anger (see Isa. 10:5–11).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:21 The terms daughter of Zion and daughter of
Jerusalem are frequently used in the OT to describe the city of Jerusalem and
its inhabitants. Jerusalem is as defenseless as a virgin daughter, but because of
the Lord’s protection she will not be violated by mighty Sennacherib. In fact,
she wags her head at him, scoffing at his pride.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:29–31 this shall be the sign for you. The second part of
Isaiah’s prophecy reveals the sign that Judah will recover from the Assyrian
assault: the survivors will be provided for. Initially they will survive only
because of the crops that spring up from what is already in the ground, but in
the third year they will be able to bear fruit from their agricultural work.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:32–34 concerning the king of Assyria. The third part of
Isaiah’s prophecy makes clear the circumstances in which Sennacherib will
return home (vv. 28, 33).
FACT
Siege mounds were mounds or ramps built out of dirt, rubble, and timbers.
They were designed so that soldiers could batter down a city’s walls and
fortifications. The Assyrians were the first to use wheeled towers with these
mounds. Protected inside the tower as it was moved up the ramp to the wall,
the soldiers could then exit the tower and invade the city. A siege mound can
still be found today at Masada.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:35–36 Sennacherib king of Assyria departed and went
home. Sennacherib returned to Nineveh when he heard that 185,000 of his
army had been struck down in one night by the angel of the LORD. Here is
God’s remarkable answer to Hezekiah’s prayer (v. 19), and the fulfillment of
God’s promise in vv. 32–34.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 19:37 Though he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch
his god, this false god could not protect the king. Sennacherib’s assassins flee
to Ararat, known to the Assyrians as Urartu, a kingdom of eastern Asia Minor
that flourished from the ninth to the sixth centuries B.C. Esarhaddon ruled
Assyria from 681 to 669 B.C.
SENNACHERIB
Sennacherib became king of the powerful Assyrian Empire following the
death of his father, Sargon II. After defeating Babylon, Sennacherib began
attacking the area of Syria and Palestine. His official records claim that he
captured 46 strong-walled cities in Israel. Following a major victory at
Lachish, he laid siege to Jerusalem. Sennacherib forced Hezekiah to pay a
huge tribute. He mocked God, urging Hezekiah to turn his back on the Lord.
Instead, Hezekiah prayed for God’s deliverance. God answered the king’s
prayer, and the siege of Jerusalem was broken when the angel of the Lord
killed 185,000 Assyrians in a single night. Sennacherib withdrew and
returned to Nineveh, only to be killed by his own sons as he worshiped in the
temple of the false god Nisroch. (2 Kings 19:35–37)
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:1 In those days. Verses 1–19 are a “flashback” to the
time around 713–712 B.C., some 12 years before Sennacherib’s invasion and
some 15 years before Hezekiah’s death (see v. 6).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:2 Hezekiah turned his face to the wall. Hezekiah is in
distress and wants to be left alone.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:3 please remember. The prayer is somewhat more self-
centered than the one in 19:15–19, stressing the king’s own righteousness.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:4 The middle court was the area between the temple and
the palace. Isaiah is on his way back to the temple.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:5 On the third day. This is a detail not included in
Isaiah’s parallel account (Isa. 38:5). you shall go up. God’s response to
Hezekiah’s prayer (2 Kings 20:3) shows that many prophecies, though stated in
unconditional terms (v. 1), have implied conditions.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:7 A cake of figs, serving as a medicated bandage, is
applied to what may have been an inflamed area. There was a belief that figs
had medicinal qualities. The healing of such a serious illness (v. 1) probably
included a supernatural work of God as well.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:8–11 A sign of the promised healing is provided in the
unnatural movement of a shadow on some steps associated with Ahaz (it
moves back, even though the sun has already caused it to go down the steps).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:13–18 he showed them all his treasure house. Hezekiah
is evidently proud of his wealth. After the kingdom falls, though, nothing shall
be left, and even some of the king’s sons (descendants) will be taken away into
exile in Babylon. On eunuchs, see note on 9:32. Here the term may be
intended symbolically rather than literally (the “sons” will be powerless
servants of the king of Babylon).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:19 Why not? Hezekiah is surprisingly unmoved by
Isaiah’s prophecy. All he cares about is peace and security in his days. Even
this “king like David” has his dark side.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 20:20 the pool and the conduit. The Gihon Spring in the
Kidron Valley was Jerusalem’s water source. A quarter-mile-long conduit
brought water from there to a reservoir at the southern end of the city of David.
Since this water supply lay outside the city’s walls, it could be cut off in time
of siege. A tunnel leading from the conduit allowed residents to access its water
from inside the city walls. In preparation for the Assyrian attack, Hezekiah had
an additional tunnel cut that diverted water from the Gihon Spring directly
underground to the Pool of Siloam, within the city walls. On the Chronicles of
the Kings, see note on 1 Kings 14:19.
FACT
Hezekiah’s tunnel. As Assyria prepared to attack Jerusalem, the city faced a
crisis, since its water supply was outside the city walls. King Hezekiah
responded by ordering the construction of a tunnel from the water source to
the Pool of Siloam, within the city walls (20:20).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 21:1–26 Manasseh and Amon. Even through the bad
times, the Lord has been faithful to Judah because of his promise to David.
Throughout chs. 16–20 it is suggested that Judah will eventually go into
exile, just like Israel. As the wicked Manasseh begins his reign, these hints
of disaster become prophetic announcements of judgment.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 21:1–9 Manasseh is the very worst of the Judean kings. He
participates in everything that has been corrupted in the religion of Israel and
adds to it despicable practices of the nations.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 21:8 For the feet of Israel to wander . . . out of the land
would be for the people to go into exile. The authors make it clear that Judah
will go into exile because of its own unfaithfulness rather than because of any
weakness on God’s part.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 21:12 ears . . . will tingle. People will react when they hear
of the disaster that happens to Jerusalem and Judah (compare Deut. 2:25;
Isa. 32:11).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 21:13 the measuring line . . . the plumb line. The city will
be assessed by the divine architect (compare the use of the measuring line in
Isa. 34:11; Lam. 2:8) and will be condemned.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 21:17–18 Manasseh’s burial site was outside the part of
Jerusalem where previous kings were buried. The garden of Uzza was perhaps
an enclosure on the Temple Mount dedicated to the Arabian goddess al-Uzza,
identified with Venus. It could also have been an enclosure at the southern end
of the Kidron Valley, just outside the city walls, where there was a “king’s
garden” (25:4; Neh. 3:15). On the Chronicles of the Kings, see note on 1
Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 21:19–26 Amon. See note on 2 Chron. 33:21–25.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 22:1–23:30 Josiah. Josiah is a long-awaited good king
(see 1 Kings 13:2). He does many significant deeds, but it comes too late to
change Judah’s fate.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 22:2 Josiah is the ideal king who does not turn from the
Mosaic law to the right or to the left (Deut. 17:20). His faithfulness to God is
even greater than that of David and Hezekiah (2 Kings 23:21–25).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 22:3–7 the king sent Shaphan. Like Joash in 12:1–16,
Josiah’s initial concern is simply to repair the temple, not to reform its worship.
In fact, the reforms introduced by Joash some 200 years previously are still in
place. The doorkeepers still collect the money for temple repairs, and the
secretary and the high priest still count and distribute the money to the men in
charge of the work.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 22:8 I have found the Book of the Law. The phrase “Book
of the Law” may refer to all or part of the Pentateuch. Most scholars think a
portion of Deuteronomy was discovered, which was read to the king and
provided the basis for his actions. This written Law had been available to the
kings of Israel and Judah in previous years (see 1 Kings 2:3; 2 Kings 10:31;
14:6; 18:6), but it was evidently lost or concealed during the long and wicked
reign of Manasseh.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 22:11–13 Brought up in a royal court that had disobeyed
God for 57 years, Josiah did not know the Lord’s demands. As soon as he
became aware, he tore his clothes in grief and despair (compare 5:7–8; 6:30)
and sent officials to inquire of the LORD.
FACT
Why did Josiah tear his clothes when the Law was read? As the Book of the
Law was read in public for the first time in nearly 60 years, King Josiah tore
his clothes as a sign of his grief. He grieved when he realized that he, as the
nation’s leader, had not been fulfilling the commandments of the Lord.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 22:14–16 The officials (v. 11) consulted an otherwise
unknown prophetess named Huldah. Her words confirm what is already
known from the unnamed prophets of 21:10–15: the Lord is going to bring
disaster on Jerusalem and its people.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 22:20 Because Josiah has humbled himself before the Lord,
he will die before the terrible events prophesied in 21:12–14 and 22:15–17
occur.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:2–3 the king went up to the house of the LORD. Since
Josiah is a faithful king, Huldah’s message of doom does not keep him from
pursuing religious reform in light of the Book of the Covenant. His first move
is to organize a covenant-renewal ceremony.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:4–9 The eastern slopes of the Kidron Valley had been
associated with idolatry since the time of Solomon (1 Kings 11:7). It was a
convenient place to destroy cult objects, thereby desecrating the valley itself as
a religious site. On male cult prostitutes (2 Kings 23:7), see note on 1 Kings
14:24. The hangings for the Asherah (2 Kings 23:7) are probably ritual
garments used in the worship of this goddess (compare 10:22).
FACT
The host of heaven refers in 23:4 to false gods, represented by celestial
bodies such as the sun, moon, and planets. King Josiah ordered the
destruction of all these symbols of pagan worship.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:8 defiled the high places where the priests had made
offerings. These were local places of worship in various cities (see note on 1
Kings 3:2).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:10 The Valley of the Son of Hinnom ran along the
western and southern sides of ancient Jerusalem until it met the Kidron Valley
running from north to south. It is associated with the worship of Molech (see
note on 1 Kings 11:7–8) at the site named Topheth. “Hinnom Valley” is the
short form of the name, transliterated into Greek as “Gehenna.”
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:11 horses that the kings of Judah had dedicated to the
sun. The practice of dedicating horses to the sun appears to have been an
Assyrian custom.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:12 altars on the roof. The roof is a natural location for
worship of the stars (see 16:1–4).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:13 Because idolatrous altars were there, the Mount of
Olives is here called the mount of corruption. Ashtoreth is the biblical name
for Astarte or Venus. On Chemosh and Milcom, see notes on 1 Kings 11:5;
11:7–8.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:14 he broke in pieces the pillars. Josiah destroys all the
buildings associated with idol worship.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:15–20 altar at Bethel. Josiah not only destroys but also
defiles (vv. 8, 10, 13) the altar by placing pagan religious objects close to
graves and human bones (vv. 6, 14). This fulfills the prophecy of 1 Kings 13:2.
See also 1 Kings 13:11–32 for the background to 2 Kings 23:17–18.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:22 A Passover like this had not been observed since the
days of the judges (see Josh. 5:10–12 for the last mention of Passover and
Deut. 16:1–8, especially v. 6, for instructions for Passover).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:24 Mediums and necromancers try to get information
by inquiring of the dead. The household gods were images of deities that were
either life-size (1 Sam. 19:13–16) or figurine-size (Gen. 31:19–35). They were
usually made of wood and covered with metal and precious stones.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:25 Despite several generations of idolatry and rebellion
against the Lord, somehow Josiah was a righteous king who turned to the
LORD with all his heart.
JOSIAH
Josiah was only eight years old when he became king of Judah. He had been
ruling Judah for 18 years when Hilkiah, the high priest, found the Book of
the Law. As soon as Josiah heard the commands of God, he tore his clothes
in grief and despair. He launched a massive effort to abolish pagan worship
throughout Judah and Israel. After organizing a covenant-renewal ceremony,
he destroyed all the buildings associated with idol worship. Among his most
significant deeds was restoring the celebration of the Passover, which had
not been observed since the days of the judges. Josiah was more faithful to
the Lord than even David and Hezekiah. He was like the ideal king
described in Deut. 17:19–20. (2 Kings 23:25)
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:26 Though Josiah was righteous, this did not turn away
God’s wrath from the nation. God will use exile to purify his people of deeply
rooted unfaithfulness.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:28–30 Pharaoh Neco killed him at Megiddo. This
battle took place in 609 B.C. Pharaoh Neco II marched north for what was
apparently the last joint Assyrian-Egyptian military effort against the
Babylonians and their allies, the Medes. Megiddo controlled the main
international highway running from Egypt to Damascus as it entered the
Jezreel Valley. Josiah wanted to prevent Egypt’s strengthening of Assyria. On
the Chronicles of the Kings, see note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:31–25:30 The End of Judah. The story of 1–2 Kings now
ends as Babylon becomes the great world power. The Babylonians destroy
Jerusalem and carry its treasures and its people to Babylon. The survival of
Josiah’s grandson Jehoiachin offers what little hope exists for the future of the
“lamp” of David (1 Kings 11:36).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:31–35 Jehoahaz. The new king of Judah is summoned to
Neco’s temporary headquarters at Riblah, as the Egyptians return from their
unsuccessful siege of Haran (609 B.C.). Neco removes Jehoahaz from power
(see note on 2 Chron. 36:1–4.)
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 23:36–24:7 The Egyptians replace Jehoahaz with his brother
Jehoiakim. He faces the armies of Babylon that have just defeated Assyria and
are now invading Palestine on their way to Egypt. Babylon’s king
Nebuchadnezzar was never able to defeat Egypt completely but he made
certain that the king of Egypt did not come again out of his land. Jehoiakim
first switched his allegiance from Egypt to Babylon (604 B.C.). Then in 601,
after Nebuchadnezzar failed to invade Egypt (that is, after three years),
Jehoiakim rebelled against Babylon and looked once again to Egypt for help
(see Jer. 46:14–28).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 24:2 And the LORD sent against him bands. See 23:26–27.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 24:5 Chronicles of the Kings. See note on 1 Kings 14:19.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 24:8–17 Jehoiachin. Babylon’s withdrawal from Palestine
in 601 B.C. turned out to be temporary. Jehoiakim’s rebellion brought the
Babylonian army to the gates of Jerusalem at the end of 598. The city
surrendered in March 597 B.C. By this time Jehoiachin was king. Significant
deportations followed (on deportation as an imperial tactic, see note on 15:27–
31). Although 1–2 Kings does not mention this, the prophet Ezekiel was among
the exiles. His prophetic ministry began a few years later in Babylon (Ezek.
1:2–3).
Exile to Babylon
597, 586, 582 B.C.
It appears that three separate deportations of Judeans to Babylon took place under the rule of
Nebuchadnezzar (see also Jer. 52:28–30). The first came during the reign of Jehoiachin, when
Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem and carried away many of the treasures of the temple and the royal
palace. The second occurred after the fall of Jerusalem in 586 B.C., when the walls of the city were
leveled and the temple was completely destroyed. The third appears to have occurred around 582 B.C.
while King Nebuchadnezzar was reasserting his control over the general region of Palestine (see note on
Jer. 52:28–30).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 24:18–25:7 Jehoiachin’s uncle Mattaniah ruled next, under
the name of Zedekiah. He was under Babylonian control. Jeremiah 27:1 and
28:1 suggest that from early in his reign he was plotting a revolt, and
eventually he rebelled. A two-year siege of Jerusalem followed. The city
eventually fell in 587 or 586 B.C. Zedekiah fled, but was captured (see also note
on 2 Chron. 36:11–16).
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 25:8–12 A few weeks after the fall of Jerusalem, the full
vengeance of the Babylonian king came upon the city.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 25:13–14 Pillars of bronze that were in the house of the
LORD begins a detailed list of temple furnishings (vv. 13–17) carried off by the
Babylonians for the value of their metal.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 25:21 Almost all hope is gone in the summary statement, So
Judah was taken into exile out of its land. But the land is still “its land,”
holding out the promise of a future return.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 25:22–26 Gedaliah, the new governor of the territory that
once was Judah, was the grandson of King Josiah’s secretary Shaphan. His
assassination caused a general flight to Egypt.
2 KINGS—NOTE ON 25:27–30 Evil-merodach was Nebuchadnezzar’s son and
successor. His release of the Judean king from prison in 561 B.C. gives the
reader some hope that there is still a future for the Davidic line.
FACT
What happened to the ark of the covenant? After the fall of Jerusalem, the
ark completely disappeared from historical records. It is unlikely that the
Babylonians took it because there is no mention of it in Babylonian records.
1 Chronicles
(return to table of contents)
1 Chronicles 1 • 1 Chronicles 2 • 1 Chronicles 3 • 1 Chronicles 4
•
1 Chronicles 5 • 1 Chronicles 6 • 1 Chronicles 7 • 1 Chronicles 8
•
1 Chronicles 9 • 1 Chronicles 10 • 1 Chronicles 11 • 1 Chronicles 12
•
1 Chronicles 13 • 1 Chronicles 14 • 1 Chronicles 15 • 1 Chronicles 16
1 Chronicles 17 • 1 Chronicles 18 • 1 Chronicles 19 • 1 Chronicles 20
1 Chronicles 21 • 1 Chronicles 22 • 1 Chronicles 23 • 1 Chronicles 24
1 Chronicles 25 • 1 Chronicles 26 • 1 Chronicles 27 • 1 Chronicles 28
1 Chronicles 29
•
•
•
•
Introduction to 1 Chronicles
Timeline
Author and Date
Basic Chronology of 1–2 Chronicles
Theme
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Key Themes
Outline for 1–2 Chronicles
The Extent of David’s Kingdom
The Extent of Solomon’s Kingdom
Global Message of 1 Chronicles
First Chronicles in Redemptive History
God’s Global Reign through a Davidic King
First Chronicles and the New Testament
First Chronicles and the Global Church Today
Study Notes
Introduction to 1–2 Chronicles
Introduction to 1–2 Chronicles
Timeline
Author and Date
The text nowhere directly identifies its author, but traditionally he has been
called “the Chronicler.” He was either a priest or Levite who was employed in
the service of the temple during the Persian period (539–332 B.C.). He had
scribal training and access to the temple records.
Basic Chronology of 1–2 Chronicles
Events Dates Passages
Foundation of the Davidic monarchy c. 1010–931 B.C. 1 Chronicles 10–2 Chronicles 9
History of Judah from the division of the kingdom until its fall 931–586 2 Chron. 10:1–36:21
Babylonian captivity 586–538 2 Chron. 36:17–21
Cyrus’s decree 538 2 Chron. 36:22–23
Theme
The central theme of Chronicles is God’s covenant with David as the basis of
Israel’s life and hope. The Davidic covenant is expressed in two institutions:
the monarchy and the temple. These institutions are related (1 Chron. 17:10b–
14), and together they represent God’s kingdom in Israel (2 Chron. 13:5, 8).
The Davidic covenant does not replace the Mosaic covenant but builds on it
for the new age of the monarchy and the temple.
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Judah and Benjamin, the only surviving tribes of Israel, had returned to the
land after the Babylonian exile. They had rebuilt the temple in Jerusalem. But
in many ways it seemed like they were still in exile (see Ezra 9:6–15; Neh.
9:32–36). There were questions about Israel’s place in God’s purposes and the
meaning of his ancient promises to David. With such questions in mind, the
Chronicler wrote his books to promote spiritual and social renewal. He
presented an interpretation of Israel’s past, drawing mainly on the books of
Samuel and Kings. He showed how the nation’s unfaithfulness to God had led
to disaster but also how its faithful kings and people had experienced God’s
blessing.
Key Themes
1. The Davidic covenant. God’s covenant with David preserved the nation
and enabled Solomon to build the temple. God is committed to
preserving the line of David’s descendants even through spiritual
unfaithfulness (2 Chron. 21:13) and exile (1 Chron. 3:17–24). Being
heirs of God’s covenant with David also involves living according to
God’s earlier covenant with Moses.
2. The temple. The temple is an expression of the Davidic covenant. David
provided for the construction of the temple and organized its personnel.
His faithful successors should ensure that the worship is maintained, and
that the building is kept in repair and is purified after defilement. The
temple personnel should come to the aid of the Davidic dynasty in times
of crisis. The Levites played an essential role in maintaining the whole
system of worship, and in many ways they are the forerunners of the
Christian ministry.
3. The people of Israel. The Chronicler sought to address some urgent
questions of his day concerning the identity of Israel. He wanted to
instill fresh confidence in the people. The genealogies of Israel that
begin the work (1 Chronicles 1–9) start by tracing the people’s ancestry
back to Adam, a striking reminder that Israel was at the center of God’s
purpose from the very beginning of creation.
Second, the genealogies makes it clear that all 12 tribes were descended
from Jacob’s sons (1 Chron. 2:1). The Chronicler’s history of the divided
kingdom (2 Chronicles 10–36) focuses mainly on Judah and Benjamin. But
he tries to show that the northern tribes are still a part of Israel, even though
they rebelled against the rightful Davidic king (2 Chron. 13:5).
While the Chronicler does focus on the nation’s kings and its priesthood, he
also includes many stories that highlight the participation of ordinary people
in the life of the nation.
Outline for 1–2 Chronicles
I. A Genealogical Presentation of the Tribes of Israel (1 Chron. 1:1–9:44)
A. Adam to Esau (1:1–54)
B. The sons of Israel (2:1–2)
C. The tribe of Judah (2:3–4:23)
D. The tribe of Simeon (4:24–43)
E. The Transjordanian tribes (5:1–26)
F. The tribe of Levi (6:1–81)
G. Other northern tribes (7:1–40)
H. The tribe of Benjamin (8:1–40)
I. The resettlement of Jerusalem (9:1–34)
J. The genealogy of Saul (9:35–44)
II. The United Kingdom of David and Solomon (1 Chron. 10:1–2 Chron.
9:31)
A. David’s rise to power over Israel (1 Chron. 10:1–12:40)
B. David’s transfer of the ark of the covenant to Jerusalem (13:1–
16:43)
C. The dynastic promise to David (17:1–27)
D. David’s wars (18:1–20:8)
E. David’s census and preparation for the temple (21:1–29:30)
F. Solomon’s temple preparations (2 Chron. 1:1–2:18)
G. Solomon’s building of the temple (3:1–5:1)
H. The dedication of the temple (5:2–7:22)
I. Solomon’s other accomplishments (8:1–16)
J. Solomon’s international relations and renown (8:17–9:31)
III. The Kingdom of Judah down to the Exile (2 Chron. 10:1–36:23)
A. Rehoboam (10:1–12:16)
B. Abijah (13:1–14:1)
C. Asa (14:2–16:14)
D. Jehoshaphat (17:1–21:1)
E. Jehoram and Ahaziah (21:2–22:12)
F. Joash (23:1–24:27)
G. Amaziah (25:1–28)
H. Uzziah (26:1–23)
I. Jotham (27:1–9)
J. Ahaz (28:1–27)
K. Hezekiah (29:1–32:33)
L. Manasseh (33:1–20)
M. Amon (33:21–25)
N. Josiah (34:1–35:27)
O. The last four kings (36:1–21)
P. Restoration (36:22–23)
The Extent of David’s Kingdom
The Extent of David’ s Kingdom
1010–971 B.C.
David’s many battles eventually established Israel as the dominant power
in Syria and Palestine. David expanded Israel’s borders until, by the end of
his reign, he controlled all of Israel, Edom, Moab, Ammon, Syria, and Zobah.
Other kingdoms, such as Tyre and Hamath, made treaties with him.
The Extent of Solomon’s Kingdom
The Extent of Solomon’ s Kingdom
c. 971–931 B.C.
Solomon’s reign marked the high point of Israel’s power and wealth in
biblical times. His father David had given him a kingdom that included
Edom, Moab, Ammon, Syria, and Zobah. Solomon would later bring the
kingdom of Hamath-zobah under his dominion as well, and his marriage to
Pharaoh’s daughter sealed an alliance with Egypt. His expansive kingdom
controlled important trade routes between several major world powers,
including Egypt, Arabia, Mesopotamia, and Anatolia (Asia Minor).
The Global Message of 1 Chronicles
First Chronicles in Redemptive History
Written soon after Israel’s devastating exile from the Promised Land, 1
Chronicles emphasizes that God still has a plan for his people and his king
in Jerusalem. The exile to Babylon had shattered Israel’s faith in God’s
covenantal promises. How could the deported descendants of Abraham ever
bless the nations (Gen. 12:1–3) as a special people (Ex. 19:5–6)? What
happened to God’s assurance to King David that his throne over Israel
would be established forever (2 Sam. 7:16)? Though many of the Jews had
already returned from exile, they remained slaves in their own land without
a king to call their own (Neh. 9:32–37).
First Chronicles reviews the past glories of King David in order to pave
the way for another Davidic king who will rule with God over the nations
(see 1 Sam. 2:10; Psalm 72).
God’s Global Reign through a Davidic King
The theme of universal redemption might seem subdued in 1 Chronicles, a
book which sandwiches various stories about Israel’s King David (1
Chronicles 10–21) in between genealogies (chs. 1–9) and various lists
regarding Israel’s army and temple furnishings (chs. 22–29). It is
undoubtedly true that 1 Chronicles mainly concerns David and the city of
Jerusalem. But this book also highlights three ways in which God’s history
with Israel occurs on a bigger stage and for a broader purpose. For King
David has been placed in a position of authority in order to embody the
reign of God over his entire creation.
The blessing of God for the nations. First, the genealogies of 1
Chronicles 1–9 stress the special place of David in God’s global plan of
salvation. First Chronicles begins with Adam just as Genesis does (Gen.
5:1; 1 Chron. 1:1), yet 1 Chronicles passes over many generations in
focusing attention on the clan of David (2:15; 3:1–24). It is worth noting
that the pivotal figure standing between the genealogies of Adam and David
is Abraham the patriarch (1:28). The rebellious descendants of Adam had
once sought to “make a name for ourselves, lest we be dispersed over the
face of the whole earth” (Gen. 11:4). In response, God promised Abraham
to “bless you and make your name great, . . . and in you all the families of
the earth shall be blessed” (Gen. 12:2–3). The descendants of Abraham
would one day become a blessing to all nations (Gen. 12:3; compare 1
Chron. 17:27). The continuity in God’s covenants with Abraham and David
is one of the main themes of 1 Chronicles (e.g., 16:16; 29:18).
The worship of God by the nations. Second, David calls on the nations to
worship God just as Israel does. When the ark is brought to Jerusalem,
David appoints the family of Asaph to declare the power of the God of
Israel to the whole world: “Make known his deeds among the peoples! . . .
Sing to the LORD, all the earth! Tell of his salvation from day to day.
Declare his glory among the nations, his marvelous works among all the
peoples! . . . Tremble before him, all the earth” (1 Chron. 16:8, 23–24, 30).
The dedication of the ark must not be a private religious affair for Israelites
only. All nations are invited to celebrate the abundant blessings of God
upon his chosen people. Such a worldwide audience for Israel’s worship is
also envisioned in psalms about Zion and, later, its temple (e.g., Psalms 46–
48; 67; 84).
The supremacy of God among the nations. Third and finally, the God
who fulfills his promises to David has no equal among the gods. David had
desired to build God a physical “house” (i.e., a temple; 1 Chron. 17:1) as
other ancient peoples did for their deities. But the God of Israel does not
need such a house (17:4–6; compare 2 Chron. 2:6; 6:18); instead, he says
that he will build David a “house” in the form of an everlasting dynasty (1
Chron. 17:10–14). This remarkable promise leads David to proclaim the
greatness of the God of Israel: “There is none like you, O LORD, and there is
no God besides you, according to all that we have heard with our ears”
(17:20). The God of the Bible cannot be limited to the puny categories and
limitations of pagan deities.
First Chronicles and the New Testament
The final Davidic king. The theme of God’s faithfulness to the Davidic
covenant in spite of the exile provides a significant bridge between the Old
and New Testaments. As does 1 Chronicles, the Gospel of Matthew begins
with a genealogy, an abbreviated one this time, which features Abraham and
David: “The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the
son of Abraham” (Matt. 1:1). Matthew then highlights the arrival of Jesus in
the world by calling attention to equal intervals from Abraham to David,
from David to the exile, and from the exile to the coming of Christ (Matt.
1:17). This equality is achieved by omitting three kings in the second group
and several generations unknown to us in the third, where thirteen
generations cover some 600 years. Such selective genealogies were
common in ancient literature. Matthew’s point is that Jesus is the rightful
heir to the covenant promises made to David about having a son who would
reign forever (2 Sam. 7:12–16).
To all nations. Because he is the long-awaited son of Abraham and
David, the arrival of Jesus in the world ushers in a new phase of God’s plan
of salvation. God now entrusts to Christians the privileges and
responsibilities of being righteous citizens of Zion: “You are the light of the
world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden. . . . Let your light shine before
others, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father
who is in heaven” (Matt. 5:14, 16; compare Ps. 48:1–2; Isa. 60:1–3). Jesus
is the last and greatest Davidic king, who commissions Christians to
instruct the peoples of the world with the truth about God: “Go therefore
and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I
have commanded you” (Matt. 28:19–20).
First Chronicles and the Global Church Today
God’s purpose throughout history to restore the world to the way he
intended it in Eden reaches a high point in the throne of David. For through
David we discover that despite the sinfulness that continues down through
David’s line, God “will establish the throne of his kingdom forever” and
God’s “steadfast love will not depart from him” (2 Sam. 7:13, 15). These
promises are the reason for the writing of 1 and 2 Chronicles.
In a day of political corruption of every kind at every level, God’s people
around the world can take heart in the invincible purpose of God to restore
a kingdom in which justice and righteousness will one day be established.
In the coming of Jesus, this kingdom has already dawned (Mark 1:14–15).
Whatever the frustrations over governmental corruption or anxiety over
political instability, in Christ anyone can be welcomed into a kingdom that
will include much suffering (Acts 14:22) but finally perfect glory and joy (1
Thess. 2:12). Every Christian can say, with Paul, “The Lord will rescue me
from every evil deed and bring me safely into his heavenly kingdom. To
him be the glory forever and ever. Amen” (2 Tim. 4:18).
From Adam to Abraham