2 KINGS 17 [†]In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, x Hoshea the son
of Elah began to reign in Samaria over Israel, and he reigned nine years.
2And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, yet not as the kings of
Israel who were before him. 3[†] y Against him came up z Shalmaneser king
of Assyria. And Hoshea became his vassal and paid him tribute. 4But the
king of Assyria found treachery in Hoshea, for he had sent messengers to
So, king of Egypt, and offered no tribute to the king of Assyria, as he had
done year by year. Therefore the king of Assyria shut him up and bound
him in prison. 5Then the king of Assyria invaded all the land and came to
Samaria, and for three years he besieged it.
The Fall of Israel
6[†]In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria a captured Samaria,
b and he carried the Israelites away to Assyria c and placed them in Halah,
and on the Habor, the river of d Gozan, and in the cities of e the Medes.
Exile Because of Idolatry
7[†]And this occurred because the people of Israel had sinned against the
LORD their God, f who had brought them up out of the land of Egypt from
under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gods 8 g and
walked in the customs of the nations whom the LORD drove out before the
people of Israel, h and in the customs that the kings of Israel had practiced.
9And the people of Israel did secretly against the LORD their God things that
were not right. They built for themselves high places in all their towns,
i from watchtower to fortified city.
10They set up for themselves j pillars
and Asherim on every high hill and under every green tree, 11and there they
made offerings on all the high places, as the nations did whom the LORD
carried away before them. And they did wicked things, provoking the LORD
to anger,
12and they served idols, k of which the LORD had said to them,
“You shall not do this.” 13Yet the LORD l warned Israel and Judah m by
every prophet n and every seer, saying, o “Turn from your evil ways and
keep my commandments and my statutes, in accordance with all the Law
that I commanded your fathers, and that I sent to you by my servants the
prophets.”
14But they would not listen, p but were stubborn, as their fathers had
been, who did not believe in the LORD their God. 15They despised his
statutes q and his covenant that he made with their fathers and the warnings
that he gave them. They went after r false idols s and became false, and they
followed the nations that were around them, concerning whom the t LORD
had commanded them that they should not do like them. 16And they
abandoned all the commandments of the LORD their God, and made for
themselves metal images of u two calves; and they v made an Asherah and
w worshiped all the host of heaven and served x Baal. 17
y And they burned
their sons and their daughters as offerings [1] and used z divination and
a omens and b sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the LORD,
provoking him to anger.
18Therefore the LORD was very angry with Israel
and removed them out of his sight. None was left but c the tribe of Judah
only.
19 d Judah also did not keep the commandments of the LORD their God,
but walked in the customs that Israel had introduced. 20And the LORD
rejected all the descendants of Israel and afflicted them e and gave them
into the hand of plunderers, until he had cast them out of his sight.
21 f When he had torn Israel from the house of David, g they made
Jeroboam the son of Nebat king. And Jeroboam drove Israel from following
the LORD h and made them commit great sin. 22The people of Israel walked
in all the sins that Jeroboam did. They did not depart from them, 23until the
LORD removed Israel out of his sight, i as he had spoken by all his servants
the prophets. j So Israel was exiled from their own land to Assyria until this
day.
Assyria Resettles Samaria
24[†] k And the king of Assyria brought people from l Babylon, Cuthah,
m Avva, n Hamath, and o Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of
Samaria instead of the people of Israel. And they took possession of
Samaria and lived in its cities. 25And at the beginning of their dwelling
there, they did not fear the LORD. Therefore the LORD sent lions among
them, which killed some of them. 26So the king of Assyria was told, “The
nations that you have carried away and placed in the cities of Samaria do
not know the law of the god of the land. Therefore he has sent lions among
them, and behold, they are killing them, because they do not know the law
of the god of the land.” 27Then the king of Assyria commanded, “Send there
one of the priests whom you carried away from there, and let him [2] go and
dwell there and teach them the law of the god of the land.” 28So one of the
priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and lived in
p Bethel and taught them how they should fear the LORD.
29But every nation still made gods of its own and put them q in the
shrines of the high places that the Samaritans had made, every nation in the
cities in which they lived. 30The men of r Babylon made Succoth-benoth,
the men of Cuth made Nergal, the men of Hamath made Ashima, 31and the
Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak; and the Sepharvites s burned their
children in the fire to t Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of
u Sepharvaim. 32 v They also feared the LORD w and appointed from among
themselves all sorts of people as priests of the high places, who sacrificed
for them in the shrines of x the high places. 33So they feared the LORD but
also served their own gods, after the manner of the nations from among
whom they had been carried away.
34To this day they do according to the former manner. They do not fear
the LORD, and they do not follow the statutes or the rules or the law or the
commandment that the LORD commanded the children of Jacob, y whom he
named Israel. 35The LORD made a covenant with them and commanded
them, z “You shall not fear other gods a or bow yourselves to them or serve
them or sacrifice to them, 36but b you shall fear the LORD, c who brought
you out of the land of Egypt with great power and d with an outstretched
arm. You shall bow yourselves to him, and to him you shall sacrifice. 37And
the statutes and the rules and the law and the commandment that he wrote
for you, e you shall always be careful to do. z You shall not fear other gods,
38and f you shall not forget the covenant that I have made with you. z You
shall not fear other gods, 39but b you shall fear the LORD your God, and he
will deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.” 40However, they
would not listen, but they did according to their former manner.
41 g So these nations feared the LORD and also served their carved images.
Their children did likewise, and their children’s children—as their fathers
did, so they do to this day.
Hezekiah Reigns in Judah