2 KINGS 4 [†]Now the wife of one of the e sons of the prophets cried to
Elisha, “Your servant my husband is dead, and you know that your servant
feared the LORD, f but the creditor has come to take my two children to be
his slaves.” 2And Elisha said to her, “What shall I do for you? Tell me; what
have you in the house?” And she said, “Your servant has nothing in the
house except a jar of oil.” 3Then he said, “Go outside, borrow vessels from
all your neighbors, empty vessels and not too few.
4Then go in and shut the
door behind yourself and your sons and pour into all these vessels. And
when one is full, set it aside.” 5So she went from him and shut the door
behind herself and her sons. And as she poured they brought the vessels to
her.
6When the vessels were full, she said to her son, “Bring me another
vessel.” And he said to her, “There is not another.” Then the oil stopped
flowing. 7She came and told the g man of God, and he said, “Go, sell the oil
and pay your debts, and you and your sons can live on the rest.”
Elisha and the Shunammite Woman
8One day Elisha went on to h Shunem, where a i wealthy woman lived, who
urged him to eat some food. So whenever he passed that way, he would turn
in there to eat food. 9And she said to her husband, “Behold now, I know that
this is a holy g man of God who is continually passing our way.
10[†]Let us
make a small room on the roof with walls and put there for him a bed, a
table, a chair, and a lamp, so that whenever he comes to us, he can go in
there.”
11One day he came there, and he turned into the chamber and rested
there. 12And he said to j Gehazi his servant, “Call this Shunammite.” When
he had called her, she stood before him. 13[†]And he said to him, “Say now
to her, ‘See, you have taken all this trouble for us; what is to be done for
you? Would you have a word spoken on your behalf to the king or to k the
commander of the army?’” She answered, “I dwell among my own people.”
14And he said, “What then is to be done for her?” Gehazi answered, “Well,
she has no son, and her husband is old.” 15He said, “Call her.” And when he
had called her, she stood in the doorway.
16And he said, “At this season,
l about this time next year, you shall embrace a son.” And she said, “No, my
lord, g O man of God; m do not lie to your servant.” 17But the woman
conceived, and she bore a son about that time l the following spring, as
Elisha had said to her.
Elisha Raises the Shunammite’s Son
18When the child had grown, he went out one day to his father among the
reapers. 19And he said to his father, “Oh, n my head, my head!” The father
said to his servant, “Carry him to his mother.” 20And when he had lifted
him and brought him to his mother, the child sat on her lap till noon, and
then he died. 21And she went up o and laid him on the bed of the g man of
God and shut the door behind him and went out. 22Then she called to her
husband and said, “Send me one of the servants and one of the donkeys,
that I may quickly go to g the man of God and come back again.” 23[†]And
he said, “Why will you go to him today? It is neither p new moon nor
Sabbath.” She said, “All is well.” 24Then she saddled the donkey, and she
said to her servant, “Urge the animal on; do not slacken the pace for me
unless I tell you.” 25So she set out and came to the man of God q at Mount
Carmel.
When the man of God saw her coming, he said to Gehazi his servant,
“Look, there is the Shunammite. 26Run at once to meet her and say to her,
‘Is all well with you? Is all well with your husband? Is all well with the
child?’” And she answered, “All is well.” 27[†]And when she came r to the
mountain to the man of God, she caught hold of his feet. And Gehazi came
to push her away. But the man of God said, “Leave her alone, for she is in
bitter distress, and the LORD has hidden it from me and has not told me.”
28Then she said, “Did I ask my lord for a son? s Did I not say, ‘Do not
deceive me?’” 29[†]He said to Gehazi, t “Tie up your garment and u take my
staff in your hand and go. If you meet anyone, v do not greet him, and if
anyone greets you, do not reply. And u lay my staff on the face of the child.”
30[†]Then the mother of the child said, w “As the LORD lives and as you
yourself live, I will not leave you.” So he arose and followed her.
31Gehazi
went on ahead and laid the staff on the face of the child, but there was no
sound or sign of life. Therefore he returned to meet him and told him, “The
child x has not awakened.”
32When Elisha came into the house, he saw the child lying dead on his
bed. 33So he went in and y shut the door behind the two of them z and
prayed to the LORD.
34[†]Then he went up and lay on the child, putting his
mouth on his mouth, his eyes on his eyes, and his hands on his hands. And
as a he stretched himself upon him, the flesh of the child became warm.
35Then he got up again and walked once back and forth in the house, and
went up a and stretched himself upon him. The child sneezed seven times,
and the child opened his eyes. 36Then he summoned Gehazi and said, “Call
this Shunammite.” So he called her. And when she came to him, he said,
“Pick up your son.” 37She came and fell at his feet, bowing to the ground.
b Then she picked up her son and went out.
Elisha Purifies the Deadly Stew
38[†]And Elisha came again to c Gilgal when d there was a famine in the
land. And as e the sons of the prophets f were sitting before him, he said to
his servant, g “Set on the large pot, and boil stew for the sons of the
prophets.” 39One of them went out into the field to gather herbs, and found
a wild vine and gathered from it his lap full of wild gourds, and came and
cut them up into the pot of stew, not knowing what they were. 40[†]And
they poured out some for the men to eat. But while they were eating of the
stew, they cried out, “O man of God, there is death in the pot!” And they
could not eat it. 41He said, “Then bring flour.” h And he threw it into the pot
and said, “Pour some out for the men, that they may eat.” And there was no
harm in the pot.
42[†]A man came from i Baal-shalishah, j bringing the man of God bread
of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley and fresh ears of grain in his sack.
And Elisha said, k “Give to the men, that they may eat.” 43But his servant
said, “How can I set this before a hundred men?” So he repeated, “Give
them to the men, that they may eat, for thus says the LORD, ‘They shall eat
and have some left.’” 44So he set it before them. And they ate and had some
left, according to the word of the LORD.
Naaman Healed of Leprosy