2 KINGS 18 [†] h In the third year of Hoshea son of Elah, king of Israel,
i Hezekiah the son of Ahaz, king of Judah, began to reign. 2He was
j twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine
years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was k Abi the daughter of Zechariah.
3
l And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that
David his father had done. 4[†] m He removed the high places and broke the
n pillars and cut down o the Asherah. And he broke in pieces p the bronze
serpent that Moses had made, for until those days the people of Israel had
made offerings to it (it was called Nehushtan). [1] 5[†] q He trusted in the
LORD, the God of Israel, r so that there was none like him among all the
kings of Judah after him, nor among those who were before him. 6 s For he
held fast to the LORD. He did not depart from following him, but kept the
commandments that the LORD commanded Moses. 7[†] t And the LORD was
with him; wherever he went out, u he prospered. He rebelled against the
king of Assyria and would not serve him. 8 v He struck down the Philistines
as far as Gaza and its territory, w from watchtower to fortified city.
9[†]In the fourth year of King Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of
Hoshea son of Elah, king of Israel, x Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up
against Samaria and besieged it, 10and at the end of three years he took it. In
the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea king of
Israel, Samaria was taken. 11The king of Assyria carried the Israelites away
to Assyria and put them in y Halah, and on the y Habor, y the river of Gozan,
and in the cities of the Medes, 12because they did not obey the voice of the
LORD their God but transgressed his covenant, even all that Moses the
servant of the LORD commanded. They neither listened nor obeyed.
Sennacherib Attacks Judah
13[†] z In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria
came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and took them. 14[†]And
Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria at Lachish, saying, “I
have done wrong; withdraw from me. Whatever you impose on me I will
bear.” a And the king of Assyria required of Hezekiah king of Judah three
hundred talents [2] of silver and thirty talents of gold. 15And Hezekiah
b gave him all the silver that was found in the house of the LORD and in the
treasuries of the king’s house. 16At that time Hezekiah stripped the gold
from the doors of the temple of the LORD and from the doorposts that
Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid and gave it to the king of Assyria.
17[†]And the king of Assyria sent the c Tartan, the Rab-saris, and the
Rabshakeh with a great army from Lachish to King Hezekiah at Jerusalem.
And they went up and came to Jerusalem. When they arrived, they came
and stood by d the conduit of the upper pool, which is on the highway to the
Washer’s Field. 18[†]And when they called for the king, there came out to
them e Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and
f Shebnah the secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, the recorder.
19[†]And the Rabshakeh said to them, “Say to Hezekiah, ‘Thus says the
great king, the king of Assyria: On what do you rest this trust of yours?
20Do you think that mere words are strategy and power for war? In whom
do you now trust, that you have rebelled against me? 21Behold, you are
trusting now in Egypt, that broken reed of g a staff, which will pierce the
hand of any man who leans on it. Such is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who
trust in him. 22But if you say to me, “We trust in the LORD our God,” is it
not he h whose high places and altars Hezekiah has removed, saying to
Judah and to Jerusalem, “You shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem”?
23Come now, make a wager with my master the king of Assyria: I will give
you two thousand horses, if you are able on your part to set riders on them.
24How then can you repulse a single captain among the least of my master’s
servants, when you trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
25Moreover, is it without the LORD that I have come up against this place to
destroy it? The LORD said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.’”
26[†]Then e Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and f Shebnah, and Joah, said to
the Rabshakeh, “Please speak to your servants in i Aramaic, for we
understand it. Do not speak to us in the language of Judah within the
hearing of the people who are on the wall.” 27But the Rabshakeh said to
them, “Has my master sent me to speak these words to your master and to
you, and not to the men sitting on the wall, who are doomed with you to eat
their own dung and to drink their own urine?”
28Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out in a loud voice in the
language of Judah: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of Assyria!
29[†]Thus says the king: ‘Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not
be able to deliver you out of my [3] hand. 30Do not let Hezekiah make you
trust in the LORD by saying, The LORD will surely deliver us, and this city
will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.’ 31[†]Do not listen to
Hezekiah, for thus says the king of Assyria: ‘Make your peace with me [4]
and come out to me. Then j each one of you will eat of his own vine, and
each one of his own fig tree, and each one of you will drink the water of his
own cistern, 32until I come and take you away to a land like your own land,
k a land of grain and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive
trees and l honey, that you may live, and not die. And do not listen to
Hezekiah when he misleads you by saying, “The LORD will deliver us.”
33 m Has any of the gods of the nations ever delivered his land out of the
hand of the king of Assyria? 34
n Where are the gods of o Hamath and
p Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and q Ivvah? Have they
delivered Samaria out of my hand? 35Who among all the gods of the lands
have delivered their lands out of my hand, r that the LORD should deliver
Jerusalem out of my hand?’”
36But the people were silent and answered him not a word, for the king’s
command was, “Do not answer him.” 37Then s Eliakim the son of Hilkiah,
who was over the household, and Shebna the secretary, and Joah the son of
Asaph, the recorder, came to Hezekiah t with their clothes torn and told him
the words of the Rabshakeh.
Isaiah Reassures Hezekiah