2 SAMUEL 15 [†]After this Absalom v got himself a chariot and horses, and
fifty men to run before him. 2And Absalom used to rise early and stand
beside w the way of the gate. And when any man had a dispute to come
before the king for judgment, Absalom would call to him and say, “From
what city are you?” And when he said, “Your servant is of such and such a
tribe in Israel,” 3[†]Absalom would say to him, “See, your claims are good
and right, but there is no man designated by the king to hear you.” 4[†]Then
Absalom would say, x “Oh that I were judge in the land! Then every man
with a dispute or cause might come to me, and I would give him justice.”
5And whenever a man came near to pay homage to him, he would put out
his hand and take hold of him and kiss him. 6Thus Absalom did to all of
Israel who came to the king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of
the men of Israel.
7[†]And at the end of four [1] years Absalom said to the king, “Please let
me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed to the LORD, in Hebron. 8For
your servant z vowed a vow a while I lived at Geshur in Aram, saying, ‘If
the LORD will indeed bring me back to Jerusalem, then I will offer worship
to [2] the LORD.’” 9The king said to him, b “Go in peace.” So he arose and
went to Hebron. 10[†]But Absalom sent secret messengers throughout all
the tribes of Israel, saying, “As soon as you hear the sound of the trumpet,
then say, ‘Absalom is king at Hebron!’” 11With Absalom went two hundred
men from Jerusalem c who were invited guests, and they went in their
innocence and knew nothing. 12[†]And while Absalom was offering the
sacrifices, he sent for [3] d Ahithophel the Gilonite, e David’s counselor,
from his city f Giloh. And the conspiracy grew strong, and the people with
Absalom g kept increasing.
David Flees Jerusalem
13[†]And a messenger came to David, saying, h “The hearts of the men of
Israel have gone after Absalom.” 14Then David said to all his servants who
were with him at Jerusalem, “Arise, and let us i flee, or else there will be no
escape for us from Absalom. Go quickly, lest he overtake us quickly and
bring down ruin on us and strike the city with the edge of the sword.” 15And
the king’s servants said to the king, “Behold, your servants are ready to do
whatever my lord the king decides.” 16So the king went out, and all his
household after him. And the king left j ten concubines to keep the house.
17And the king went out, and all the people after him. And they halted at the
last house.
18[†]And k all his servants passed by him, and all the Cherethites, and all
the Pelethites, and all the six hundred Gittites who had followed him from
l Gath, passed on before the king. 19Then the king said to m Ittai the Gittite,
“Why do you also go with us? Go back and stay with the king, for you are a
foreigner and also an exile from your home. 20You came only yesterday,
and shall I today make you wander about with us, since I go n I know not
where? Go back and take your brothers with you, and may the LORD
show [4] steadfast love and faithfulness to you.” 21But Ittai answered the
king, o “As the LORD lives, and as my lord the king lives, p wherever my
lord the king shall be, whether for death or for life, there also will your
servant be.” 22And David said to Ittai, “Go then, pass on.” So Ittai the
Gittite passed on with all his men and all the little ones who were with him.
23[†]And all the land wept aloud as all the people passed by, and the king
crossed q the brook r Kidron, and all the people passed on toward s the
wilderness.
24[†]And t Abiathar came up, and behold, u Zadok came also with all the
Levites, v bearing the ark of the covenant of God. And they set down the ark
of God until the people had all passed out of the city.
25[†]Then the king
said to Zadok, “Carry the ark of God back into the city. If I find favor in the
eyes of the LORD, he will w bring me back and let me see both it and his
x dwelling place. 26But if he says, ‘I have no y pleasure in you,’ behold, here
I am, z let him do to me what seems good to him.” 27[†]The king also said
to Zadok the priest, “Are you not a a seer? Go back [5] to the city in peace,
with b your two sons, Ahimaaz your son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.
28[†]See, I will wait at c the fords of s the wilderness until word comes from
you to inform me.” 29So Zadok and Abiathar carried the ark of God back to
Jerusalem, and they remained there.
30[†]But David went up the ascent of the Mount of Olives, weeping as he
went, d barefoot and e with his head covered. And all the people who were
with him covered their heads, and they went up, f weeping as they went.
31[†]And it was told David, “Ahithophel is among the conspirators with
Absalom.” And David said, “O LORD, please g turn the counsel of
Ahithophel into foolishness.”
32While David was coming to the summit, where God was worshiped,
behold, Hushai h the Archite came to meet him i with his coat torn and i dirt
on his head. 33[†]David said to him, “If you go on with me, you will be j a
burden to me. 34But if you return to the city and say to Absalom, k ‘I will be
your servant, O king; as I have been your father’s servant in time past, so
now I will be your servant,’ then you will defeat for me the counsel of
Ahithophel. 35Are not Zadok and Abiathar the priests with you there? So
whatever you hear from the king’s house, l tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the
priests. 36Behold, m their two sons are with them there, Ahimaaz, Zadok’s
son, and Jonathan, Abiathar’s son, m and by them you shall send to me
everything you hear.” 37So Hushai, n David’s friend, came into the city,
o just as Absalom was entering Jerusalem.
David and Ziba