2 SAMUEL 12 [†]And the LORD sent x Nathan to David. He came to him and
said to him, y “There were two men in a certain city, the one rich and the
other poor.
2The rich man had very many flocks and herds, 3but the poor
man had nothing but one little ewe lamb, which he had bought. And he
brought it up, and it grew up with him and with his children. It used to eat
of his morsel and drink from his cup and lie in his arms, [1] and it was like a
daughter to him. 4[†]Now there came a traveler to the rich man, and he was
unwilling to take one of his own flock or herd to prepare for the guest who
had come to him, but he took the poor man’s lamb and prepared it for the
man who had come to him.” 5[†]Then David’s anger was greatly kindled
against the man, and he said to Nathan, z “As the LORD lives, the man who
has done this deserves to die, 6and he shall restore the lamb a fourfold,
because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.”
7[†]Nathan said to David, “You are the man! Thus says the LORD, the
God of Israel, b ‘I anointed you king over Israel, and I delivered you out of
the hand of Saul. 8[†]And I gave you your master’s house and your master’s
wives into your arms and gave you the house of Israel and of Judah. And if
this were too little, I would add to you as much more. 9[†] c Why have you
despised the word of the LORD, d to do what is evil in his sight? e You have
struck down Uriah the Hittite with the sword and f have taken his wife to be
your wife and have killed him with the sword of the Ammonites. 10[†]Now
therefore the sword shall never depart from your house, because you have
despised me and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your wife.’
11Thus says the LORD, ‘Behold, I will raise up evil against you out of your
own house. And I will take your wives before your eyes and give them to
your neighbor, and he shall lie with your wives in the sight of this sun.
12For you did it secretly, g but I will do this thing before all Israel and
before the sun.’” 13[†] h David said to Nathan, i “I have sinned against the
LORD.” And Nathan said to David, j “The LORD also has put away your sin;
you shall not die. 14Nevertheless, because by this deed you have utterly
k scorned the LORD, [2] the child who is born to you shall die.” 15[†]Then
Nathan went to his house.
David’s Child Dies
And the LORD afflicted the child that Uriah’s wife bore to David, and he
became sick. 16David therefore sought God on behalf of the child. And
David l fasted and went in m and lay all night on the ground. 17And the
elders of his house stood beside him, to raise him from the ground, but he
would not, nor did he eat food with them. 18On the seventh day the child
died. And the servants of David were afraid to tell him that the child was
dead, for they said, “Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spoke to him,
and he did not listen to us. How then can we say to him the child is dead?
He may do himself some harm.” 19But when David saw that his servants
were whispering together, David understood that the child was dead. And
David said to his servants, “Is the child dead?” They said, “He is dead.”
20[†]Then David arose from the earth n and washed and anointed himself
and changed his clothes. And he went into the house of the LORD o and
worshiped. He then went to his own house. And when he asked, they set
food before him, and he ate. 21Then his servants said to him, “What is this
thing that you have done? You fasted and wept for the child while he was
alive; but when the child died, you arose and ate food.” 22He said, “While
the child was still alive, I fasted and wept, for I said, p ‘Who knows whether
the LORD will be gracious to me, that the child may live?’ 23[†]But now he
is dead. Why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him,
q but he will not return to me.”
Solomon’s Birth
24[†]Then David comforted his wife, Bathsheba, and went in to her and lay
with her, and r she bore a son, and he called his name s Solomon. And the
LORD loved him 25and sent a message by Nathan the prophet. So he called
his name Jedidiah, [3] because of the LORD.
Rabbah Is Captured
26[†] t Now Joab u fought against v Rabbah of the Ammonites and took the
royal city.
27And Joab sent messengers to David and said, “I have fought
against Rabbah; moreover, I have taken the city of waters. 28Now then
gather the rest of the people together and encamp against the city and take
it, lest I take the city and it be called by my name.” 29So David gathered all
the people together and went to Rabbah and fought against it and took it.
30And he took the crown of their king from his head. The weight of it was a
talent [4] of gold, and in it was a precious stone, and it was placed on
David’s head. And he brought out the spoil of the city, a very great amount.
31And he brought out the people who were in it and set them to labor with
saws and iron picks and iron axes and made them toil at [5] the brick kilns.
And thus he did to all the cities of the Ammonites. Then David and all the
people returned to Jerusalem.
Amnon and Tamar