2 SAMUEL 7 [†] s Now when the king lived in his house and the LORD t had
given him rest from all his surrounding enemies, 2the king said to u Nathan
the prophet, “See now, I dwell v in a house of cedar, but the ark of God
dwells w in a tent.” 3And Nathan said to the king, x “Go, do all that is in
your heart, for the LORD is with you.”
4But that same night the word of the LORD came to Nathan, 5“Go and tell
my servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD: y Would you build me a house to
dwell in? 6[†]I have not lived in a house z since the day I brought up the
people of Israel from Egypt to this day, but I have been moving about a in a
tent for my dwelling. 7In all places where b I have moved with all the
people of Israel, did I speak a word with c any of the judges [1] of Israel,
whom I commanded d to shepherd my people Israel, saying, “Why have
you not built me a house of cedar?”’ 8[†]Now, therefore, thus you shall say
to my servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts, e I took you from the
pasture, from following the sheep, that you should be prince [2] over my
people Israel. 9 f And I have been with you wherever you went and have cut
off all your enemies from before you. And I will make for you a great name,
like the name of the great ones of the earth. 10And I will appoint a place for
my people Israel g and will plant them, so that they may dwell in their own
place h and be disturbed no more. i And violent men shall afflict them no
more, as formerly,
11 j from the time that I appointed judges over my people
Israel. And k I will give you rest from all your enemies. Moreover, the LORD
declares to you that l the LORD will make you a house. 12[†] m When your
days are fulfilled and n you lie down with your fathers, o I will raise up your
offspring after you, who shall come from your body, and I will establish his
kingdom. 13
p He shall build a house for my name, and q I will establish the
throne of his kingdom forever.
14[†] r I will be to him a father, and he shall
be to me a son. When he commits iniquity, s I will discipline him with the
rod of men, with the stripes of the sons of men, 15
s but my steadfast love
will not depart from him, t as I took it from Saul, whom I put away from
before you. 16 u And your house and your kingdom shall be made sure
forever before me. [3] u Your throne shall be established forever.’” 17In
accordance with all these words, and in accordance with all this vision,
Nathan spoke to David.
David’s Prayer of Gratitude
18[†]Then King David went in and sat before the LORD and said, v “Who am
I, O Lord GOD, and what is my house, that you have brought me thus far?
19And yet this was a small thing in your eyes, O Lord GOD. w You have
spoken also of your servant’s house for a great while to come, and this is
instruction for mankind, O Lord GOD! 20And what more can David say to
you? x For you know your servant, O Lord GOD! 21Because of your
promise, and according to your own heart, you have brought about all this
greatness, to make your servant know it. 22
y Therefore you are great, O
LORD God. z For there is none like you, and there is no God besides you,
according to all that we have heard with our ears. 23 a And who is like your
people Israel, the one nation on earth whom God went to redeem to be his
people, making himself a name b and doing for them [4] great and awesome
things by driving out [5] before your people, whom c you redeemed for
yourself from Egypt, a nation and its gods? 24 d And you established for
yourself your people Israel to be your people forever. And you, O LORD,
became their God. 25And now, O LORD God, confirm forever the word that
you have spoken concerning your servant and concerning his house, and do
as you have spoken. 26And your name will be magnified forever, saying,
‘The LORD of hosts is God over Israel,’ and the house of your servant David
will be established before you. 27For you, O LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, have made this revelation to your servant, saying, ‘I will build you a
house.’ Therefore your servant has found courage to pray this prayer to you.
28And now, O Lord GOD, you are God, and e your words are true, and you
have promised this good thing to your servant. 29Now therefore may it
please you to bless the house of your servant, so that it may continue
forever before you. For you, O Lord GOD, have spoken, f and with your
blessing shall the house of your servant be blessed forever.”
David’s Victories