2 SAMUEL 2 [†]After this David e inquired of the LORD, “Shall I go up into
any of the cities of Judah?” And the LORD said to him, “Go up.” David said,
“To which shall I go up?” And he said, “To f Hebron.” 2So David went up
there, and g his two wives also, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail the widow
of Nabal of Carmel. 3And David brought up h his men who were with him,
everyone with his household, and they lived in the towns of Hebron.
4[†]And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David i king over
the house of Judah.
When they told David, j “It was the men of Jabesh-gilead who buried
Saul,” 5David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh-gilead and said to
them, k “May you be blessed by the LORD, because you showed this loyalty
to Saul your lord and buried him. 6Now may the LORD show steadfast love
and faithfulness to you. And I will do good to you because you have done
this thing. 7Now therefore let your hands be strong, and be valiant, for Saul
your lord is dead, and i the house of Judah has anointed me king over
them.”
Ish-bosheth Made King of Israel
8[†]But l Abner the son of Ner, commander of Saul’s army, took Ish-
bosheth the son of Saul and brought him over to m Mahanaim, 9and he
made him king over Gilead and the Ashurites and Jezreel and Ephraim and
Benjamin and all Israel. 10[†]Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, was forty years old
when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years. But the house
of Judah followed David. 11 n And the time that David was king in Hebron
over i the house of Judah was seven years and six months.
The Battle of Gibeon
12[†]Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul,
went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon. 13[†]And Joab the son of Zeruiah and
the servants of David went out and met them at o the pool of Gibeon. And
they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the
other side of the pool. 14And Abner said to Joab, “Let the young men arise
and compete before us.” And Joab said, “Let them arise.” 15Then they arose
and passed over by number, twelve for Benjamin and Ish-bosheth the son of
Saul, and twelve of the servants of David. 16And each caught his opponent
by the head and thrust his sword in his opponent’s side, so they fell down
together. Therefore that place was called Helkath-hazzurim, [1] which is at
Gibeon. 17And the battle was very fierce that day. And Abner and the men
of Israel were beaten before the servants of David.
18And the p three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab, Abishai, and Asahel.
Now Asahel was q as swift of foot as a wild gazelle. 19[†]And Asahel
pursued Abner, and as he went, he turned neither to the right hand nor to the
left from following Abner.
20Then Abner looked behind him and said, “Is it
you, Asahel?” And he answered, “It is I.” 21Abner said to him, “Turn aside
to your right hand or to your left, and seize one of the young men and take
his spoil.” But Asahel would not turn aside from following him. 22And
Abner said again to Asahel, “Turn aside from following me. Why should I
strike you to the ground? How then could I lift up my face to your brother
Joab?” 23[†]But he refused to turn aside. Therefore Abner struck him r in
the stomach with the butt of his spear, so that the spear came out at his
back. And he fell there and died where he was. And all who came to the
place where Asahel had fallen and died, stood still.
24But Joab and Abishai pursued Abner. And as the sun was going down
they came to the hill of Ammah, which lies before Giah on the way to the
wilderness of Gibeon. 25And the people of Benjamin gathered themselves
together behind Abner and became one group and took their stand on the
top of a hill. 26Then Abner called to Joab, “Shall the sword devour forever?
Do you not know that the end will be bitter? How long will it be before you
tell your people to turn from the pursuit of their brothers?” 27And Joab said,
“As God lives, if s you had not spoken, surely the men would not have
given up the pursuit of their brothers until the morning.” 28[†]So Joab blew
the trumpet, and all the men stopped and pursued Israel no more, nor did
they fight anymore.
29[†]And Abner and his men went all that night through t the Arabah.
They crossed the Jordan, and marching the whole morning, they came to
u Mahanaim. 30Joab returned from the pursuit of Abner. And when he had
gathered all the people together, there were missing from David’s servants
nineteen men besides Asahel. 31But the servants of David had struck down
of Benjamin 360 of Abner’s men. 32And they took up Asahel and buried
him in the tomb of his father, which was at Bethlehem. And Joab and his
men marched all night, and the day broke upon them at Hebron.
Abner Joins David
2 SAMUEL 3 There was a long war between the house of Saul and the house
of David. And David grew stronger and stronger, while the house of Saul
became weaker and weaker.
2[†] v And sons were born to David at Hebron: his firstborn was Amnon,
of w Ahinoam of Jezreel; 3and his second, Chileab, of w Abigail the widow
of Nabal of Carmel; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah x the
daughter of Talmai king of y Geshur; 4and the fourth, z Adonijah the son of
Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital; 5and the sixth, Ithream,
of Eglah, David’s wife. These were born to David in Hebron.
6While there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David,
Abner was making himself strong in the house of Saul. 7[†]Now Saul had a
concubine whose name was a Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. And Ish-
bosheth said to Abner, b “Why have you gone in to my father’s concubine?”
8Then Abner was very angry over the words of Ish-bosheth and said, “Am I
c a dog’s head of Judah? To this day I keep showing steadfast love to the
house of Saul your father, to his brothers, and to his friends, and have not
given you into the hand of David. And yet you charge me today with a fault
concerning a woman. 9
d God do so to Abner and more also, if I do not
accomplish for David e what the LORD has sworn to him, 10to transfer the
kingdom from the house of Saul and set up the throne of David over Israel
and over Judah, f from Dan to Beersheba.” 11And Ish-bosheth could not
answer Abner another word, because he feared him.
12[†]And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, [1] saying, “To
whom does the land belong? Make your covenant with me, and behold, my
hand shall be with you to bring over all Israel to you.” 13And he said,
“Good; I will make a covenant with you. But one thing I require of you;
that is, g you shall not see my face unless you first bring h Michal, Saul’s
daughter, when you come to see my face.” 14Then David sent messengers to
Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, saying, “Give me my wife Michal, i for whom I
paid the bridal price of a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.” 15And Ish-
bosheth sent and took her from her husband Paltiel the son of Laish. 16But
her husband went with her, weeping after her all the way to j Bahurim. Then
Abner said to him, “Go, return.” And he returned.
17And Abner conferred with the elders of Israel, saying, “For some time
past you have been seeking David as king over you. 18Now then bring it
about, k for the LORD has promised David, saying, ‘By the hand of my
servant David I will save my people Israel from the hand of the Philistines,
and from the hand of all their enemies.’” 19Abner also spoke to l Benjamin.
And then Abner went to tell David at Hebron all that Israel and the whole
house of Benjamin thought good to do.
20When Abner came with twenty men to David at Hebron, David made a
feast for Abner and the men who were with him. 21And Abner said to
David, “I will arise and go and m will gather all Israel to my lord the king,
that they may make a covenant with you, and that you may n reign over all
that your heart desires.” So David sent Abner away, and he went in peace.
22[†]Just then the servants of David arrived with Joab from a raid,
bringing much spoil with them. But Abner was not with David at Hebron,
for he had sent him away, and he had gone in peace. 23When Joab and all
the army that was with him came, it was told Joab, “Abner the son of Ner
came to the king, and he has let him go, and he has gone in peace.” 24Then
Joab went to the king and said, “What have you done? Behold, Abner came
to you. Why is it that you have sent him away, so that he is gone? 25[†]You
know that Abner the son of Ner came to deceive you and to know o your
going out and your coming in, and to know all that you are doing.”
Joab Murders Abner
26[†]When Joab came out from David’s presence, he sent messengers after
Abner, and they brought him back from the cistern of Sirah. But David did
not know about it. 27[†]And when Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him
aside into the midst of the gate to speak with him privately, p and there he
struck him q in the stomach, so that he died, for the blood of Asahel his
brother.
28[†]Afterward, when David heard of it, he said, “I and my
kingdom are forever guiltless before the LORD for the blood of Abner the
son of Ner.
29
r May it fall upon the head of Joab and upon all his father’s
house, and may the house of Joab never be without s one who has a
discharge or who is t leprous or who holds a spindle or who falls by the
sword or who lacks bread!” 30So Joab and Abishai his brother killed Abner,
because u he had put their brother Asahel to death in the battle at Gibeon.
David Mourns Abner
31Then David said to Joab and to all the people who were with him, v “Tear
your clothes and w put on sackcloth and mourn before Abner.” And King
David followed the bier.
32They buried Abner at Hebron. And the king lifted
up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept. 33And
the king x lamented for Abner, saying,
y “Should Abner die z as a fool dies?
34 Your hands were not bound;
your feet were not fettered;
as one falls before the wicked
you have fallen.”
And all the people wept again over him. 35Then all the people came a to
persuade David to eat bread while it was yet day. But David swore, saying,
b “God do so to me and more also, if I taste bread or anything else c till the
sun goes down!” 36And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them,
as everything that the king did pleased all the people. 37So all the people
and all Israel understood that day that it had not been the king’s will to put
to death Abner the son of Ner.
38And the king said to his servants, “Do you
not know that a prince and a great man has fallen this day in Israel? 39And I
was gentle today, though anointed king. d These men, the sons of Zeruiah,
are more severe than I. e The LORD repay the evildoer according to his
wickedness!”
Ish-bosheth Murdered
2 SAMUEL 4 When Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, heard that Abner had died at
Hebron, f his courage failed, and all Israel was dismayed. 2[†]Now Saul’s
son had two men who were captains of raiding bands; the name of the one
was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, sons of Rimmon a man of
Benjamin from Beeroth ( g for Beeroth also is counted part of Benjamin;
3 h the Beerothites fled i to Gittaim and have been sojourners there to this
day).
4[†] j Jonathan, the son of Saul, had a son who was crippled in his feet. He
was five years old when the news about Saul and Jonathan k came from
Jezreel, and his nurse took him up and fled, and as she fled in her haste, he
fell and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.
5Now the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, set out,
and about the heat of the day they came to the house of Ish-bosheth as he
was taking his noonday rest. 6And they came into the midst of the house as
if to get wheat, and they stabbed him l in the stomach. Then Rechab and
Baanah his brother escaped. [1] 7[†]When they came into the house, as he
lay on his bed in his bedroom, they struck him and put him to death and
beheaded him. They took his head and went by the way of m the Arabah all
night, 8and brought the head of Ish-bosheth to David at Hebron. And they
said to the king, “Here is the head of Ish-bosheth, the son of Saul, your
enemy, n who sought your life. The LORD has avenged my lord the king this
day on Saul and on his offspring.” 9But David answered Rechab and
Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, o “As the LORD
lives, p who has redeemed my life out of every adversity,
10[†] q when one
told me, ‘Behold, Saul is dead,’ and thought he was bringing good news, r I
seized him and killed him at Ziklag, which was the reward I gave him for
his news. 11How much more, when wicked men have killed a righteous man
in his own house on his bed, shall I not now s require his blood at your hand
and destroy you from the earth?” 12[†]And David commanded his young
men, and they killed them and cut off their hands and feet and hanged them
beside the pool at Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth and buried
it t in the tomb of Abner at Hebron.
David Anointed King of Israel