2 SAMUEL 13 [†]Now w Absalom, David’s son, had a beautiful sister, whose
name was x Tamar. And after a time Amnon, David’s son, loved her.
2And
Amnon was so tormented that he made himself ill because of his sister
Tamar, for she was a virgin, and it seemed impossible to Amnon to do
anything to her.
3[†]But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the
son of y Shimeah, David’s brother. And Jonadab was a very crafty man.
4And he said to him, “O son of the king, why are you so haggard morning
after morning? Will you not tell me?” Amnon said to him, “I love Tamar,
my brother Absalom’s sister.” 5Jonadab said to him, “Lie down on your bed
and pretend to be ill. And when your father comes to see you, say to him,
‘Let my sister Tamar come and give me bread to eat, and prepare the food
in my sight, that I may see it and eat it from her hand.’” 6[†]So Amnon lay
down and pretended to be ill. And when the king came to see him, Amnon
said to the king, “Please let my sister Tamar come and z make a couple of
cakes in my sight, that I may eat from her hand.”
7Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, “Go to your brother Amnon’s
house and prepare food for him.” 8So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s
house, where he was lying down. And she took dough and kneaded it and
made cakes in his sight and baked the cakes. 9And she took the pan and
emptied it out before him, but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, a “Send
out everyone from me.” So everyone went out from him. 10Then Amnon
said to Tamar, “Bring the food into the chamber, that I may eat from your
hand.” And Tamar took the cakes she had made and brought them into the
chamber to Amnon her brother.
11But when she brought them near him to
eat, he took hold of her and said to her, “Come, lie with me, my sister.”
12[†]She answered him, “No, my brother, do not violate [1] me, for b such a
thing is not done in Israel; do not do this c outrageous thing. 13As for me,
where could I carry my shame? And as for you, you would be as one of
d the outrageous fools in Israel. Now therefore, please speak to the king, for
he will not withhold me from you.” 14But he would not listen to her, and
being stronger than she, he violated her and lay with her.
15[†]Then Amnon hated her with very great hatred, so that the hatred
with which he hated her was greater than the love with which he had loved
her. And Amnon said to her, “Get up! Go!” 16But she said to him, “No, my
brother, for this wrong in sending me away is greater than the other that you
did to me.” [2] But he would not listen to her.
17He called the young man
who served him and said, “Put this woman out of my presence and bolt the
door after her.” 18Now she was wearing e a long robe [3] with sleeves, for
thus were the virgin daughters of the king dressed. So his servant put her
out and bolted the door after her.
19[†]And Tamar f put ashes on her head
and g tore the long robe that she wore. And h she laid her hand on her head
and went away, crying aloud as she went.
20[†]And her brother Absalom said to her, “Has Amnon your brother
been with you? Now hold your peace, my sister. He is your brother; do not
take this to heart.” So Tamar lived, a desolate woman, in her brother
Absalom’s house. 21[†]When King David heard of all these things, he was
very angry. [4] 22But Absalom spoke to Amnon i neither good nor bad, for
Absalom hated Amnon, because he had violated his sister Tamar.
Absalom Murders Amnon
23[†]After two full years Absalom had j sheepshearers at Baal-hazor, which
is near Ephraim, and Absalom invited all the king’s sons. 24And Absalom
came to the king and said, “Behold, your servant has sheepshearers. Please
let the king and his servants go with your servant.” 25But the king said to
Absalom, “No, my son, let us not all go, lest we be burdensome to you.” He
pressed him, but he would not go but gave him his blessing. 26Then
Absalom said, “If not, please let my brother Amnon go with us.” And the
king said to him, “Why should he go with you?” 27But Absalom pressed
him until he let Amnon and all the king’s sons go with him. 28Then
Absalom commanded his servants, “Mark when Amnon’s k heart is merry
with wine, and when I say to you, ‘Strike Amnon,’ then kill him. Do not
fear; have I not commanded you? Be courageous and be valiant.” 29[†]So
the servants of Absalom did to Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then
all the king’s sons arose, and each mounted his mule and fled.
30While they were on the way, news came to David, “Absalom has struck
down all the king’s sons, and not one of them is left.” 31Then the king arose
and l tore his garments and m lay on the earth. And all his servants who
were standing by tore their garments. 32But n Jonadab the son of Shimeah,
David’s brother, said, “Let not my lord suppose that they have killed all the
young men, the king’s sons, for Amnon alone is dead. For by the command
of Absalom this has been determined from the day he violated his sister
Tamar.
33Now therefore let not my lord the king so o take it to heart as to
suppose that all the king’s sons are dead, for Amnon alone is dead.”
Absalom Flees to Geshur
34 p But Absalom fled. And the young man who kept the watch lifted up his
eyes and looked, and behold, many people were coming from the road
behind him [5] by the side of the mountain. 35And Jonadab said to the king,
“Behold, the king’s sons have come; as your servant said, so it has come
about.” 36And as soon as he had finished speaking, behold, the king’s sons
came and lifted up their voice and wept. And the king also and all his
servants wept very bitterly.
37[†] q But Absalom fled and went to r Talmai the son of Ammihud, king
of s Geshur. And David mourned for his son day after day.
38
q So Absalom
fled and went to Geshur, and was there three years. 39And the spirit of the
king [6] longed to go out [7] to Absalom, because t he was comforted about
Amnon, since he was dead.
Absalom Returns to Jerusalem