2 THESSALONIANS 3 [†]Finally, brothers, [1] j pray for us, that k the word of
the Lord may speed ahead and be honored, [2] as happened among you, 2and
l that we may be delivered from wicked and evil men. For m not all have
faith. 3[†]But n the Lord is faithful. He will establish you and o guard you
against p the evil one. [3] 4And q we have confidence in the Lord about you,
that you are doing and will do the things that we command. 5[†]May the
Lord r direct your hearts to the love of God and to the steadfastness of
Christ.
Warning Against Idleness
6[†]Now we command you, brothers, s in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, t that you keep away from any u brother v who is walking in idleness
and not in accord with the tradition that you received from us. 7[†]For you
yourselves know w how you ought to imitate us, because x we were not idle
when we were with you, 8[†]nor did we eat anyone’s bread without paying
for it, but y with toil and labor we worked night and day, that we might not
be a burden to any of you. 9It was z not because we do not have that right,
but to give you in ourselves a an example to imitate. 10For even when we
were with you, we would give you this command: b If anyone is not willing
to work, let him not eat. 11[†]For we hear that some among you c walk in
idleness, not busy at work, but d busybodies. 12[†]Now such persons we
command and encourage in the Lord Jesus Christ to do their work quietly
and to earn their own living. [4]
13[†]As for you, brothers, e do not grow weary in doing good. 14[†]If
anyone does not obey what we say in this letter, take note of that person,
and f have nothing to do with him, that he may be ashamed. 15
g Do not
regard him as an enemy, but h warn him as a brother.
Benediction
16[†]Now may i the Lord of peace himself j give you peace at all times in
every way. k The Lord be with you all.
17[†]I, Paul, write l this greeting with my own hand. This is the sign of
genuineness in every letter of mine; it is the way I write. 18 m The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Study Notes for 2 Thessalonians
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:1–2 Opening. See note on 1 Thess. 1:1. All
three missionaries are still together, so 2 Thessalonians was probably
written soon after 1 Thessalonians.
FACT
Why were Christians being persecuted? The fact that Christians
worshiped only one God excluded them from participation in community
gatherings, which often focused on other gods. The church’s custom of
meeting secretly also raised suspicions of disloyalty to the Roman
Empire.
1:3–12 Thanksgiving and Comfort for the Persecuted Thes­ salonians.
In Greek, vv. 3–10 are one long sentence expressing Paul’s gratefulness
and words of encouragement.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:3 ought . . . as is right. Paul gives thanks to
God for the Thessalonians’ increasing faith and love (compare 1 Thess.
3:6). The fact that their love for one another is increasing is an answer to
Paul’s prayer in 1 Thess. 3:12.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:5 The Thessalonians’ endurance and faith
under persecution show evidence of the righteous judgment of God. God
is giving them the grace to endure. He is clearly on their side and is
working to make them worthy for entrance into the kingdom of God.
Compare Phil. 1:28, where the Philippian Christians’ fearless perseverance
during persecution is a proof that they will be saved and their enemies
destroyed when Jesus returns.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:6–7a God judges fairly. Those now causing
trouble for the Thessalonian Christians will be afflicted. The believers will
get relief at the second coming.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:7b when the Lord Jesus is revealed from
heaven (see 1 Thess. 4:16–17). Jesus is called “Lord.” This identifies him
as Yahweh, who carries out final judgment (see Isaiah 64; 66).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:8 in flaming fire. See Isa. 66:15–16.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:9 eternal destruction. Unbelievers will not
simply cease to exist. See Matt. 25:46; Rev. 14:9–11.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:10 when he comes. The punishment of
unbelievers and the reward of believers both occur on the day of the Lord
(that day). This is the day when Jesus comes to save his people. Confusion
over the timing of the day of the Lord is a major problem in Thessalonica
(2:2). Paul’s description of the day in 1:7b–10 was intended to solve the
problem. glorified in his saints. By saving his people from sin; Jesus’ glory
will be seen in them (see Rom. 8:17–18, 30). Saints are “holy ones.” our
testimony to you. God’s saving act in Christ.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 1:11 To this end. That is, in view of vv. 5–10.
make you worthy. Building on v. 5, Paul now prays that the Thessalonians
may be made worthy of this calling (see 1 Thess. 2:12). work of faith.
Work inspired by faith.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:1–17 Disproving the False Claim about the
Day of the Lord. Paul reassures the Thessalonians that the day of the Lord
has not come. In 1 Thess. 5:1–11 he responded to a question from the
community about the timing of the day of the Lord. He has now heard that
some of them have believed the false idea that the day of the Lord has
already arrived (2 Thess. 2:1–2). Paul states that before that day comes, a
final rebellion and the appearance of the “man of lawlessness” must occur
(vv. 3–12). Then he reassures the Thessalonians that they are destined for
glory (vv. 13–14). Finally, he calls on them to hold firmly to the traditions
he passed on to them (v. 15). He concludes with prayer (vv. 16–17).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:2 The Thessalonians were shaken and
alarmed by the false claim that the day of the Lord had already come. Paul
did not know the source of the confusion, but he suggests a number of
possibilities: a spirit. An alleged prophetic word. a spoken word. A
teaching or a sermon. a letter seeming to be from us. Paul seems to have
suspected that a letter forged in his name was circulating (see 3:17). the day
of the Lord. See notes on Amos 5:18–20; 1 Thess. 5:2–3. Paul seems to
teach here, as elsewhere (1 Cor. 1:8; Phil. 1:10; 1 Thess. 5:1–4; 2 Thess.
1:7–10), that the day of the Lord and Christ’s second coming occur at the
same time. They are parts of one event.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:3 Two events will come before the day of the
Lord. Neither has happened yet. The first event is the rebellion. In light of
vv. 9–12, Paul probably is describing a rebellion of all humanity against
God. the man of lawlessness is revealed. The person in this second event
is elsewhere called the “antichrist” (1 John 2:18, 22; 4:3; 2 John 7). He will
oppose God. He is the son of destruction. He will be defeated and
destroyed when Jesus returns (2 Thess. 2:8).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:4 Paul draws on Dan. 11:36–37 when he
writes that the lawless one opposes and exalts himself against every so-
called god or object of worship. The Antichrist will insist that he alone is
God. His actions will be like those of Antiochus IV Epiphanes (see Dan.
11:31–35 and notes). The context seems to indicate a concrete and
observable act of defiance against God. The temple of God has been
variously interpreted as the church, the heavenly temple, and the Jerusalem
temple.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:5–7 The man of lawlessness cannot be
unveiled while what is restraining him now is at work. Paul refers also to
he who now restrains. Scholarly theories on the identity of this restrainer
include the Roman Empire/emperor, the Holy Spirit, and the archangel
Michael. The restrainer makes sure that the man of lawlessness is revealed
in his time, and not before (see v. 3).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:8 the breath of his mouth (compare Isa.
11:4). Jesus will easily destroy the Antichrist.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:9–10 those who are perishing. Those who
have not believed the gospel.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:11–12 God sends them a strong delusion.
As part of his righteous judgment, God lets unbelievers follow the
Antichrist (believe what is false).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:13 beloved by the Lord. . . . God chose you.
See note on 1 Thess. 1:4. This may echo Deut. 26:18, which refers to God’s
choice of Israel. as the firstfruits. Like the first harvested fruit or grain, the
Thessalonians are set apart for God’s use (see Lev. 23:10–11). Christians
are divinely elected to be saved. Note the involvement of each person of
the Trinity: the Father elects, the Son loves, and the Holy Spirit makes holy.
FACT
Sanctification (2:13) refers to the transforming work of the Holy Spirit in
a believer’s life, whereby the person becomes increasingly more like
Christ. This ongoing process continues until the redeemed person is
resurrected and made completely holy in heaven (glorification).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:14 this. That is, salvation (v. 13). obtain the
glory. See 1:10; 1 Thess. 5:9.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 2:15 Paul encourages the Thessalonians to
stand firm and hold to the traditions that were communicated to them by
our spoken word during his ministry among them and by 1 Thessalonians
(our letter).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:1–5 Transition. Paul requests prayer for
his work, reassures them of God’s faithfulness, and closes by praying for
them.
FACT
Tough love. In contrast to the warm and joyful tone of 1 Thessalonians, 2
Thessalonians includes some blunt commands as Paul addresses bad
behavior and bad thinking within the church. Some, for instance, were
refusing to work for a living (3:6–15).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:1–2 Paul asks them to pray that the word of
the Lord (the gospel) would speed ahead (progress) and be honored (by
people accepting its truth).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:3–4 guard you against the evil one. Satan
has been trying to destroy the Thessalonians’ young faith. But God’s
faithfulness assures Paul that the Evil One will not succeed.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:5 the steadfastness of Christ. Either Christ’s
endurance as a model for Christians or the perseverance Christ gives to
believers.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:6–15 The Problem of Lazy Christians.
Paul instructs the Thes­ salonians to discipline those refusing to work.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:6 Paul tells the Thessalonians to discipline
those who refuse to work and depend on others to support them. They are to
keep away from these people, which probably means removing them from
the church. However, Paul still regards them as “brothers” (v. 15). This
behavior was not in accord with the tradition passed on by the
missionaries regarding the necessity of working for a living.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:7–10 The missionaries had taught the need to
work for a living both by example and through instruction.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:8–9 eat anyone’s bread without paying for
it. Paul refused to depend on others for his living. He took on manual labor
in addition to his ministry commitments to avoid being a financial burden
to the Thessalonians. He did so even though he had the God-given right to
be supported (see 1 Cor. 9:3–15; 1 Thess. 2:9).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:11 not busy at work, but busybodies. See 1
Tim. 5:13.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:12 work quietly. The opposite of being
“busybodies” (v. 11).
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:13 do not grow weary in doing good. Paul
encourages those with money to continue being charitable, though only to
those who are deserving.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:14 The purpose of keeping away from the
lazy is so these brothers will be ashamed, repent, and be restored to the
community.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:16–18 Conclusion. The letter concludes
with a blessing, a final greeting, and a prayer for grace.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:16 Lord of peace. Jesus has reconciled
Christians to God. He is able to replace their fear (2:2) with peace.
2 THESSALONIANS—NOTE ON 3:17 Paul makes it clear that most of the letter
was dictated to a secretary. The final greeting was written in Paul’s own
handwriting. This served as a mark of its authenticity.
1 Timothy
(return to table of contents)
1 Timothy 1 • 1 Timothy 2 • 1 Timothy 3 • 1 Timothy 4 • 1 Timothy 5
1 Timothy 6
Introduction to 1 Timothy
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipient
Theme
Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of 1 Timothy
Global Message of 1 Timothy
First Timothy and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in 1 Timothy
The Global Message of 1 Timothy for Today
Study Notes
•
Introduction to 1 Timothy
Introduction to 1 Timothy
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipient
The apostle Paul probably wrote this letter to Timothy in the mid-60s A.D.,
during a mission trip not recorded in Scripture. This trip took place after the
events described in Acts, between Paul’s first and final Roman imprisonments.
Theme
The letter’s theme is that the gospel leads to practical, visible change in
believers’ lives. The true gospel, in contrast to false teaching, must and will
always lead to godliness.
Purpose
Paul wrote 1 Timothy to advise his coworker Timothy about issues in the
church in Ephesus. False teachers are the main cause for the letter. Their
teaching apparently involved incorrect assumptions about the law (1:7–11) and
not allowing marriage and certain foods (4:1–5). Paul’s real concern is with the
results of the false teaching. For example, it promotes mere theories over solid
truth (1:4; 6:4). It also leads to arrogance (6:4) and greed (6:5–10). Paul
focuses on the fact that true Christianity is shown in lifestyles shaped by the
gospel. Those whose lives are not shaped by the gospel have turned away from
the faith (1:6, 19–20; 4:1; 5:6, 8, 11–12, 15; 6:9–10).
Key Themes
1. The gospel produces holiness in the lives of believers. There is no
legitimate separation between belief and behavior. Thus, those who
profess faith but show no progress in godliness should question their
spiritual health (1:5; 2:8–15; 3:1–16; 4:6–16; 5:4–6, 8; 6:3–5, 11–14, 18–
19).
2. Worldwide evangelism is essential. It is rooted in God’s own evangelistic
desire (1:15; 2:1–7; 3:16; 4:10).
3. One key evidence of receiving the gospel is proper behavior in corporate
worship, in matters like evangelistic prayer, unity, modesty, and
submission (2:1–15).
4. Church leaders should be people whose lives are shaped by the gospel
(3:1–13; 4:6–16).
5. Appropriate honor is a key element in how Christians should relate to one
another in the church (5:1–6:2).
6. Everything God created is good. It is to be appreciated, but not worshiped
(4:4–5; 6:17–19).
7. It is important to protect the purity of the gospel (1:3–7, 18–20; 4:6–16;
6:2b–3, 12, 20–21).
Outline
I. Greeting (1:1–2)
II. Confronting the False Teaching (1:3–20)
III. Descriptions of Gospel-shaped Living (2:1–3:13)
IV . Purpose of Writing: Behavior in the Church (3:14–16)
V . Identifying the False Teaching (4:1–5)
VI. How Timothy Should Be Shaped by the Gospel (4:6–16)
VII. How Specific Groups in the Church Should Be Shaped by the Gospel
(5:1–6:2a)
VIII. Confronting the False Teaching Again (6:2b–21)
The Setting of 1 Timothy
c. A.D. 62–64
Paul likely wrote 1 Timothy during a fourth missionary journey not recorded
in the book of Acts. Writing from an unknown location, Paul wrote to Timothy
at Ephesus to instruct him on how to lead the church there. Ephesus was a
wealthy and highly influential port city in the Roman province of Asia,
renowned for its temple of Artemis (Diana).
The Global Message of 1 Timothy
Paul’s first letter to Timothy is filled with practical instructions about the
life of the local church. Yet all this practical instruction is rooted in the
gospel (1 Tim. 1:5, 15), and is intended to promote godliness and to spread
the message of salvation to all people (2:1–7; 3:1–13; 4:10).
First Timothy and Redemptive History
Israel’ s calling. In the opening chapters of Genesis we see God placing the
first humans in the garden of Eden and enjoying perfect fellowship with
them. With the fall into sin, that fellowship was broken. Down through
history, God has been working to restore humanity to himself. With the call
of Abraham, God set apart a man whose descendants were to be a blessing
to all the nations of the world (Gen. 12:1–3). These descendants were the
nation of Israel. They were “a kingdom of priests and a holy nation” (Ex.
19:6). Israel was set apart to be “a light for the nations, that my salvation
may reach to the end of the earth” (Isa. 49:6).
The church’ s calling. Yet Israel largely failed in this calling. When Jesus
came, however, he reorganized the people of God around himself. He called
twelve disciples, representing the twelve tribes of Israel (Matt. 10:1–4). His
life and teaching indicated that he viewed himself as doing what Israel had
failed to do, starting by remaining faithful while in a time of testing in the
wilderness (Luke 4:1–13). The New Testament letters, likewise, speak of
the church as inheriting the calling of Israel to bring God’s blessing to the
nations (1 Pet. 2:9–10; Acts 13:47). When 1 Timothy tells us of the church,
then, we are learning of the institution that God planned from before time as
the means of reaching the world with his blessings. Paul tells us elsewhere
that the church is the result of “the plan of the mystery hidden for ages”
(Eph. 3:9), and that the inclusion of the Gentiles and thus all people
everywhere was God’s gracious saving intention from before time.
For all people. This heart of God for all people groups to come to know
his saving grace resounds through 1 Timothy. God “desires all people to be
saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth” (1 Tim. 2:4). Christ “gave
himself as a ransom for all” (2:6). After Jesus’ death and resurrection he
was “proclaimed among the nations” (3:16). God is “the Savior of all
people” (4:10). Time and again Paul reminds Timothy, and us, of the Lord’s
great heart of compassion for all people throughout the world.
Universal Themes in 1 Timothy
Prayer for those in authority. “I urge,” says Paul, “that supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all people, for kings
and all who are in high positions” (1 Tim. 2:1–2). While Paul directs
believers to have special regard for fellow Christians, in 1 Timothy he
expands our horizons to intercede for “all people,” all the way up to world
leaders. This has significant implications for global believers today, as we
pray for those in positions of authority or political influence.
Church leadership. More clearly than any other New Testament book, 1
Timothy describes the divinely ordained structure of church leadership.
Paul tells us of the need for elders who are qualified in certain ways, and of
deacons (1 Tim. 3:1–13). He describes the way older men and women
should be honored, and how younger men and women should be treated
(5:1–2). He gives instructions on caring for widows (5:3–16). The honor
due to the church’s preachers and teachers is discussed (5:17–18), as is
church discipline (5:19–21). In all this the global church is given a blueprint
for how to structure local churches in a way that is faithful, effective, and
fruitful.
The danger of false teaching. Throughout 1 Timothy Paul returns to the
threat of false teaching. This is the very first thing he says to Timothy,
encouraging the young pastor to exhort believers to hold to the teaching
they have received and to avoid quarrels about myths and genealogies, as
well as mistaken notions about the law (1 Tim. 1:3–8). In chapter 4 Paul
refers to another strand of false teaching, in which the good things of life
such as food and marriage are not received as gifts from God (4:1–5). Paul
closes the letter by once more urging Timothy to avoid false teachers,
whose messages stir up dissension and promote the love of money (6:3–10).
All of these teachings are relevant for the church today: sound teaching on
God’s law, sound teaching on receiving physical blessings such as food and
sexuality, and sound teaching on money and contentment.
The Global Message of 1 Timothy for Today
Paul’s first letter to Timothy gives believers a clear picture of what the
church is to look like. Two points, however, are particularly striking about
the way Paul describes healthy church life.
First, the qualifications Paul gives for both elders and deacons have to do
with godliness more than with competency as defined by the world. Elders,
for example, are to be self-controlled, respectable, and hospitable (1 Tim.
3:2). Deacons must be guarded in their use of the tongue, sober, and not
greedy (3:8). These qualities describe a person of mature character, more
than simply a person with impressive natural abilities. This is a strong
reminder to the global church of the crucial importance of choosing leaders
who walk with God faithfully, whatever their level of gifting or eloquence
or natural charisma.
Second, the local church and its various ministries and responsibilities
are all rooted in the gospel. It is striking that, in an epistle written to a
young pastor, with lots of practical instruction for the local church, Paul
begins with a moving statement of his own salvation through Jesus Christ
(1 Tim. 1:12–17). The gospel is then connected to Paul’s guidance
throughout the rest of the letter—whether he is discussing prayer for
political leaders (2:2), selection of elders and deacons (3:1–13), the
avoidance of irreverent controversy (4:7), or dealing with money and the
wealthy (6:3–10).
The global church is to gladly receive the practical guidance Paul gives
in 1 Timothy, and resolutely put it into effect. Through it all, the gospel is to
reign supreme, to the great glory of Jesus Christ (1 Tim. 1:17; 6:16).
Greeting