ACTS 20 [†]After the uproar ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, and after
encouraging them, he said farewell and q departed for Macedonia.
2[†]When he had gone through those regions and had given them much
encouragement, he came to Greece. 3[†]There he spent three months, and
when r a plot was made against him by the Jews [1] as he was about to set
sail for Syria, he decided to return through Macedonia. 4[†]Sopater the
Berean, son of Pyrrhus, accompanied him; and of the Thessalonians,
s Aristarchus and Secundus; and s Gaius of Derbe, and t Timothy; and the
Asians, u Tychicus and v Trophimus. 5[†]These went on ahead and were
waiting for w us at x Troas, 6but we sailed away from Philippi after y the
days of Unleavened Bread, and in five days we came to them at Troas,
where we stayed for seven days.
Eutychus Raised from the Dead
7[†] z On the first day of the week, when we were gathered together a to
break bread, Paul talked with them, intending to depart on the next day, and
he prolonged his speech until midnight. 8There were many lamps in b the
upper room where we were gathered. 9And a young man named Eutychus,
sitting at the window, sank into a deep sleep as Paul talked still longer. And
being overcome by sleep, he c fell down from the third story and was taken
up dead. 10But Paul went down and d bent over him, and taking him in his
arms, said, e “Do not be alarmed, for his life is in him.” 11And when Paul
had gone up and f had broken bread and eaten, he conversed with them a
long while, until daybreak, and so departed. 12And they took the youth
away alive, and were not a little comforted.
13But going ahead to the ship, we set sail for Assos, intending to take
Paul aboard there, for so he had arranged, intending himself to go by land.
14And when he met us at Assos, we took him on board and went to
Mitylene. 15[†]And sailing from there we came the following day opposite
Chios; the next day we touched at Samos; and [2] the day after that we went
to Miletus. 16For Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus, so that he might not
have to spend time in Asia, for he was hastening g to be at Jerusalem, if
possible, h on the day of Pentecost.
Paul Speaks to the Ephesian Elders
17[†]Now from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called i the elders of the
church to come to him. 18And when they came to him, he said to them:
j “You yourselves know k how I lived among you the whole time j from
the first day that I set foot in Asia, 19 l serving the Lord m with all humility
and with n tears and with trials that happened to me through o the plots of
the Jews; 20[†]how I p did not shrink from declaring to you anything that
was profitable, and q teaching you in public and from house to house,
21
r testifying both to Jews and to Greeks of s repentance toward God and of
t faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. 22[†]And now, behold, I am going to
Jerusalem, constrained u by [3] the Spirit, not knowing what will happen to
me there, 23except that v the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city that
w imprisonment and x afflictions await me. 24[†]But y I do not account my
life of any value nor as precious to myself, if only z I may finish my course
and a the ministry b that I received from the Lord Jesus, c to testify to d the
gospel of e the grace of God. 25And now, behold, f I know that none of you
among whom I have gone about g proclaiming the kingdom will see my
face again. 26[†]Therefore h I testify to you this day that i I am innocent of
the blood of all, 27for j I did not shrink from declaring to you k the whole
counsel of God. 28[†] l Pay careful attention to yourselves and to all m the
flock, in which n the Holy Spirit has made you o overseers, p to care for
q the church of God, [4] which he r obtained s with his own blood. [5] 29[†]I
r know that after my departure t fierce wolves will come in among you,
u not sparing the flock; 30and v from among your own selves will arise men
speaking twisted things, to draw away the disciples after them.
31[†]Therefore w be alert, remembering that x for three years I did not cease
night or day y to admonish every one z with tears. 32And now a I commend
you to God and to b the word of his grace, which is able to c build you up
and to give you d the inheritance among all those who are sanctified. 33 e I
coveted no one’s silver or gold or apparel. 34
f You yourselves know that
g these hands ministered to my necessities and h to those who were with me.
35[†]In all things i I have shown you that j by working hard in this way we
must k help the weak and l remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he
himself said, ‘It is more blessed m to give than to receive.’”
36And when he had said these things, n he knelt down and prayed with
them all. 37And o there was much weeping on the part of all; p they
embraced Paul and p kissed him, 38[†]being sorrowful most of all because
of q the word he had spoken, that they would not see his face again. And
r they accompanied him to the ship.
Paul Goes to Jerusalem