ACTS 21 [†]And when s we had parted from them and set sail, we t came by
a straight course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to
Patara. [1] 2And having found a ship crossing to Phoenicia, we went aboard
and set sail. 3[†]When we had come in sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left
we sailed to Syria and landed at Tyre, for there the ship was to unload its
cargo. 4[†]And having sought out the disciples, we stayed there for seven
days. And u through the Spirit they were telling Paul not to go on to
Jerusalem. 5When our days there were ended, we departed and went on our
journey, and they all, with wives and children, v accompanied us until we
were outside the city. And w kneeling down on the beach, we prayed 6and
said farewell to one another. Then we went on board the ship, and they
returned home.
7When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais,
and we greeted x the brothers [2] and stayed with them for one day.
8[†]On
the next day we departed and came to Caesarea, and we entered the house
of y Philip z the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
9He had four unmarried daughters, a who prophesied. 10[†]While we were
staying for many days, a prophet named b Agabus came down from Judea.
11And coming to us, he c took Paul’s belt and bound his own feet and hands
and said, d “Thus says the Holy Spirit, e ‘This is how the Jews [3] at
Jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt and f deliver him into the
hands of the Gentiles.’” 12When we heard this, we and the people there
g urged him not to go up to Jerusalem. 13Then Paul answered, g “What are
you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For h I am ready not only to be
imprisoned but even to die in Jerusalem i for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
14And since he would not be persuaded, j we ceased and said, k “Let the
will of the Lord be done.”
15[†]After these days we got ready and went up to Jerusalem. 16And
some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, bringing us to the house
of Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we should lodge.
Paul Visits James
17[†]When we had come to Jerusalem, l the brothers received us gladly.
18[†]On the following day Paul went in with us to m James, and all n the
elders were present. 19After greeting them, o he related one by one p the
things that God had done among the Gentiles through his q ministry.
20And
when they heard it, they r glorified God. And they said to him, “You see,
brother, how many thousands there are among the Jews of those who have
believed. They are all s zealous for the law,
21[†]and they have been told
about you that you teach all t the Jews who are among the Gentiles to
forsake Moses, u telling them v not to circumcise their children or w walk
according to x our customs. 22What then is to be done? They will certainly
hear that you have come. 23[†]Do therefore what we tell you. We have four
men y who are under a vow; 24take these men and z purify yourself along
with them and pay their expenses, y so that they may shave their heads.
Thus all will know that there is nothing in what they have been told about
you, but that you yourself also live in observance of the law.
25[†]But as for
the Gentiles who have believed, a we have sent a letter with our judgment
that they should abstain from what has been sacrificed to idols, and from
blood, and from what has been strangled, [4] and from sexual immorality.”
26[†]Then Paul took the men, and the next day z he purified himself along
with them and b went into the temple, giving notice when the days of
purification would be fulfilled and c the offering presented for each one of
them.
Paul Arrested in the Temple
27[†]When c the seven days were almost completed, d the Jews from Asia,
e seeing him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd and laid hands on
him, 28[†]crying out, “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who f is teaching
everyone everywhere against the people and g the law and g this place.
Moreover, he even brought Greeks into the temple and h has defiled g this
holy place.” 29For they had previously seen i Trophimus the Ephesian with
him in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought him into the
temple. 30[†]Then all the city was stirred up, and the people ran together.
They seized Paul and j dragged him out of the temple, and at once the gates
were shut. 31[†] j And as they were seeking to kill him, word came to the
tribune of k the cohort that all Jerusalem was in confusion. 32 l He at once
took soldiers and centurions and ran down to them. And when they saw the
tribune and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul. 33[†]Then the tribune
came up and arrested him and ordered him m to be bound n with two chains.
He inquired who he was and what he had done. 34 o Some in the crowd were
shouting one thing, some another. And as he could not learn the facts
because of the uproar, he ordered him to be brought into p the barracks.
35And when he came to the steps, he was actually carried by the soldiers
because of the violence of the crowd, 36for the mob of the people followed,
crying out, q “Away with him!”
Paul Speaks to the People
37As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he said to the tribune,
“May I say something to you?” And he said, “Do you know Greek?
38[†]Are you not r the Egyptian, then, who recently stirred up a revolt and
led the four thousand men of the Assassins out s into the wilderness?”
39[†]Paul replied, t “I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no
obscure city. I beg you, permit me to speak to the people.” 40[†]And when
he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the steps, u motioned with
his hand to the people. And when there was a great hush, he addressed them
in v the Hebrew language, [5] saying:
ACTS 22 w “Brothers and fathers, hear the defense that I now make
before you.”
2And when they heard that he was addressing them in x the Hebrew
language, [1] they became even more quiet. And he said:
3[†] y “I am a Jew, born in Tarsus in Cilicia, but brought up in this city,
educated z at the feet of a Gamaliel [2] b according to the strict manner of the
law of our fathers, c being zealous for God d as all of you are this day.
4[†] e I persecuted f this Way g to the death, binding and delivering to prison
both men and women, 5as h the high priest and i the whole council of elders
can bear me witness. From them I received letters to j the brothers, and I
journeyed toward Damascus to take those also who were there and bring
them in bonds to Jerusalem to be punished.
6 k “As I was on my way and drew near to Damascus, about noon a great
light from heaven suddenly shone around me. 7And I fell to the ground and
heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’ 8And
I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me, ‘I am l Jesus of
Nazareth, whom you are persecuting.’ 9 m Now those who were with me saw
the light but did not understand [3] the voice of the one who was speaking to
me. 10And I said, n ‘What shall I do, Lord?’ And the Lord said to me, ‘Rise,
and go into Damascus, and there you will be told all that is appointed for
you to do.’ 11And since I could not see because of the brightness of that
light, I was led by the hand by those who were with me, and came into
Damascus.
12[†]“And o one Ananias, a devout man p according to the law, q well
spoken of by all the Jews who lived there, 13 r came to me, and standing by
me said to me, ‘Brother Saul, receive your sight.’ And s at that very hour I
received my sight and saw him. 14And he said, t ‘The God of our fathers
u appointed you to know his will, v to see w the Righteous One and x to hear
a voice from his mouth; 15for y you will be a witness for him to everyone of
what z you have seen and heard. 16[†]And now why do you wait? a Rise and
be baptized and b wash away your sins, c calling on his name.’
17[†] d “When I had returned to Jerusalem and e was praying in the
temple, I fell into f a trance 18[†]and saw him saying to me, g ‘Make haste
and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your
testimony about me.’ 19And I said, ‘Lord, they themselves know that in one
synagogue after another h I imprisoned and i beat those who believed in
you. 20And when the blood of Stephen j your witness was being shed, k I
myself was standing by and l approving and k watching over the garments
of those who killed him.’ 21And he said to me, ‘Go, for I will send you m far
away to the Gentiles.’”
Paul and the Roman Tribune
22Up to this word they listened to him. Then they raised their voices and
said, n “Away with such a fellow from the earth! For o he should not be
allowed to live.” 23And as they were shouting and throwing off their cloaks
and flinging dust into the air,
24the tribune ordered him to be brought into
p the barracks, saying that he should be q examined by flogging, to find out
why they were shouting against him like this. 25[†]But when they had
stretched him out for the whips, [4] Paul said to the centurion who was
standing by, “Is it lawful for you to flog r a man who is a Roman citizen and
uncondemned?” 26When the centurion heard this, he went to the tribune and
said to him, “What are you about to do? For this man is a Roman citizen.”
27So the tribune came and said to him, “Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?”
And he said, “Yes.” 28[†]The tribune answered, “I bought this citizenship
for a large sum.” Paul said, “But I am a citizen by birth.” 29So those who
were about s to examine him withdrew from him immediately, and the
tribune also t was afraid, u for he realized that Paul was a Roman citizen
and that v he had bound him.
Paul Before the Council
30[†]But on the next day, w desiring to know the real reason why he was
being accused by the Jews, he unbound him and commanded the chief
priests and all the council to meet, and he brought Paul down and set him
before them.
ACTS 23 And looking intently at the council, Paul said, “Brothers, x I
have lived my life before God in all good conscience up to this day.” 2And
the high priest y Ananias commanded those who stood by him z to strike
him on the mouth. 3[†]Then Paul said to him, “God is going to strike you,
you a whitewashed b wall! Are you sitting to judge me according to the law,
and yet c contrary to the law you c order me to be struck?” 4Those who
stood by said, “Would you revile d God’s high priest?” 5[†]And Paul said,
e “I did not know, brothers, that he was the high priest, for it is written,
f ‘You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.’”
6Now when Paul perceived that one part were g Sadducees and the other
Pharisees, he cried out in the council, “Brothers, h I am a Pharisee, a son of
Pharisees. It is i with respect to the j hope and the resurrection of the dead
that I am on trial.” 7And when he had said this, a dissension arose between
the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the assembly was divided. 8For the
Sadducees k say that there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit, but the
Pharisees acknowledge them all. 9Then a great clamor arose, and some of
l the scribes of the Pharisees’ party stood up and contended sharply, m “We
find nothing wrong in this man. What n if a spirit or an angel spoke to
him?” 10And when the dissension became violent, the tribune, afraid that
Paul would be torn to pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down
and take him away from among them by force and bring him into o the
barracks.
11 p The following night q the Lord stood by him and said, r “Take
courage, for s as you have testified to the facts about me in Jerusalem, so
you must t testify also in Rome.”
A Plot to Kill Paul
12When it was day, u the Jews made a plot and v bound themselves by an
oath neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. 13There were more
than forty who made this conspiracy.
14[†]They went to the chief priests and
elders and said, “We have strictly bound ourselves by an oath to taste no
food till we have killed Paul. 15Now therefore you, along with the council,
give notice to the tribune to bring him down to you, as though you were
going to determine his case more exactly. And we are ready to kill him
before he comes near.”
16[†]Now the son of Paul’s sister heard of their ambush, so he went and
entered w the barracks and told Paul. 17Paul called one of the centurions and
said, “Take this young man to the tribune, for he has something to tell him.”
18[†]So he took him and brought him to the tribune and said, “Paul x the
prisoner called me and asked me to bring this young man to you, as he has
something to say to you.” 19The tribune took him by the hand, and going
aside asked him privately, “What is it that you have to tell me?” 20And he
said, y “The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council
tomorrow, as though they were going to inquire somewhat more closely
about him. 21[†]But do not be persuaded by them, for more than forty of
their men are lying in ambush for him, who z have bound themselves by an
oath neither to eat nor drink till they have killed him. And now they are
ready, waiting for your consent.” 22So the tribune dismissed the young man,
charging him, “Tell no one that you have informed me of these things.”
Paul Sent to Felix the Governor
23[†]Then he called two of the centurions and said, “Get ready two hundred
soldiers, with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen to go as far as
Caesarea at the third hour of the night. [1] 24[†]Also provide mounts for Paul
to ride and bring him safely to a Felix b the governor.” 25[†]And he wrote a
letter to this effect:
26“Claudius Lysias, to c his Excellency the governor Felix, d greetings.
27[†] e This man was seized by the Jews and f was about to be killed by them
f when I came upon them with the soldiers and rescued him, g having
learned that he was a Roman citizen. 28And h desiring to know the charge
for which they were accusing him, I brought him down to their council. 29I
found that he was being accused i about questions of their law, but j charged
with nothing deserving death or imprisonment. 30
k And when it was
disclosed to me l that there would be a plot against the man, I sent him to
you at once, m ordering his accusers also to state before you what they have
against him.”
31[†]So the soldiers, according to their instructions, took Paul and
brought him by night to Antipatris. 32And on the next day they returned to
n the barracks, letting the horsemen go on with him. 33When they had come
to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, they presented Paul
also before him. 34[†]On reading the letter, he asked what o province he was
from. And when he learned p that he was from Cilicia, 35[†]he said, “I will
give you a hearing q when your accusers arrive.” And he commanded him
to be guarded in Herod’s r praetorium.
Paul Before Felix at Caesarea