ACTS 13 [†]Now there were in the church at Antioch n prophets and
n teachers, o Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, [1] Lucius of Cyrene,
Manaen a lifelong friend of p Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 2[†]While they
were worshiping the Lord and fasting, q the Holy Spirit said, r “Set apart for
me Barnabas and Saul s for the work to which I have called them.”
3[†]Then after fasting and t praying they laid their hands on them and u sent
them off.
Barnabas and Saul on Cyprus
4[†]So, being sent out v by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia, and
from there they sailed to Cyprus. 5[†]When they arrived at Salamis, they
proclaimed the word of God w in the synagogues of the Jews. And they had
x John to y assist them. 6[†]When they had gone through the whole island as
far as Paphos, they came upon a certain z magician, a a Jewish false prophet
named Bar-Jesus. 7[†]He was with b the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man
of intelligence, who summoned Barnabas and Saul and sought to hear the
word of God. 8[†]But Elymas the z magician (for that is the meaning of his
name) c opposed them, seeking to turn d the proconsul away from the faith.
9[†]But Saul, who was also called Paul, e filled with the Holy Spirit, looked
intently at him 10and said, “You f son of the devil, you enemy of all
righteousness, full of all deceit and g villainy, will you not stop h making
crooked i the straight paths of the Lord? 11[†]And now, behold, j the hand of
the Lord is upon you, and you will be blind and unable to see the sun for a
time.” Immediately mist and darkness fell upon him, and he went about
seeking k people to lead him by the hand. 12Then the proconsul believed,
when he saw what had occurred, for he was astonished at l the teaching of
the Lord.
Paul and Barnabas at Antioch in Pisidia
13[†]Now Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and came to Perga
in Pamphylia. And m John left them and returned n to Jerusalem, 14[†]but
they went on from Perga and came to Antioch in Pisidia. And o on the
Sabbath day p they went into the synagogue and sat down. 15[†]After q the
reading from r the Law and the Prophets, s the rulers of the synagogue sent
a message to them, saying, “Brothers, if you have any t word of
encouragement for the people, say it.” 16[†]So Paul stood up, and
u motioning with his hand said:
“Men of Israel and v you who fear God, listen. 17 w The God of this
people Israel x chose our fathers and y made the people great z during their
stay in the land of Egypt, and a with uplifted arm he led them out of it.
18And for about b forty years c he put up with [2] them in the wilderness.
19And d after destroying e seven nations in the land of Canaan, f he gave
them their land as an inheritance. 20[†]All this took about 450 years. And
after that g he gave them judges until h Samuel the prophet. 21Then i they
asked for a king, and God gave them Saul j the son of Kish, a man of the
tribe of Benjamin, for forty years. 22And k when he had removed him, l he
raised up David to be their king, of whom he testified and said, m ‘I have
found in David the son of Jesse n a man after my heart, o who will do all my
will.’ 23 p Of this man’s offspring God has brought to Israel q a Savior, Jesus,
r as he promised. 24Before his coming, s John had proclaimed t a baptism of
repentance to all the people of Israel. 25And as John was finishing his
course, u he said, ‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. No, but
behold, after me one is coming, the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy
to untie.’
26“Brothers, sons of the family of Abraham, and those among you v who
fear God, to us has been sent w the message of x this salvation. 27For those
who live in Jerusalem and their rulers, because y they did not recognize him
nor understand z the utterances of the prophets, which are read every
Sabbath, a fulfilled them by condemning him. 28And b though they found in
him no guilt worthy of death, c they asked Pilate to have him executed.
29And when d they had carried out all that was written of him, e they took
him down from f the tree and laid him in a tomb. 30But g God raised him
from the dead, 31[†]and for many days h he appeared to those i who had
come up with him j from Galilee to Jerusalem, k who are now l his
witnesses to the people. 32And we bring you the good news m that what God
promised to the fathers, 33 n this he has fulfilled to us their children by
raising Jesus, as also it is written in the second Psalm,
o “‘You are my Son,
today I have begotten you.’
34And as for the fact that he raised him from the dead, p q no more to return
to corruption, he has spoken in this way,
“‘I will give you r the holy and sure blessings of David.’
35Therefore he says also in another psalm,
s “‘You will not let your Holy One see corruption.’
36For David, after he had t served the purpose of God in his own generation,
u fell asleep and v was laid with his fathers and saw corruption, 37but he
whom w God raised up did not see corruption. 38[†]Let it be known to you
therefore, brothers, x that through this man y forgiveness of sins is
proclaimed to you, 39and by him z everyone who believes is freed [3] from
everything a from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses.
40Beware, therefore, lest what is said in the Prophets should come about:
41
b “‘Look, you scoffers,
be astounded and perish;
for I am doing a work in your days,
a work that you will not believe, even if one tells it to you.’”
42[†]As they went out, the people begged that these things might be told
them the next Sabbath. 43And after the meeting of the synagogue broke up,
many Jews and c devout d converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas,
who, as they spoke with them, urged them e to continue in f the grace of
God.
44[†]The next Sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of
the Lord. 45 g But h when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with
i jealousy and began to contradict what was spoken by Paul, j reviling him.
46[†]And Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, saying, “It was necessary
that the word of God k be spoken first to you. l Since you thrust it aside and
judge yourselves m unworthy of eternal life, behold, we n are turning to the
Gentiles. 47
o For so the Lord has commanded us, saying,
p “‘I have made you q a light for the Gentiles,
that you may r bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’”
48[†]And when the Gentiles heard this, they began rejoicing and
s glorifying the word of the Lord, and as many as were appointed to eternal
life believed. 49And the word of the Lord was spreading throughout the
whole region. 50
t But the Jews [4] incited the devout u women of high
standing and the leading men of the city, v stirred up persecution against
Paul and Barnabas, and w drove them out of their district. 51[†]But they
x shook off the dust from their feet against them and went to Iconium.
52And the disciples were filled y with joy and z with the Holy Spirit.
Paul and Barnabas at Iconium