AMOS 8 [†] a This is what the Lord GOD showed me: behold, a basket of
summer fruit. 2And he said, b “Amos, what do you see?” And I said, c “A
basket of summer fruit.” Then the LORD said to me,
d “The end [1] has come upon my people Israel;
I will never again pass by them.
3 e The songs of the temple [2] f shall become wailings [3] in that day,”
declares the Lord GOD.
g “So many dead bodies!”
“They are thrown everywhere!”
h “Silence!”
4 Hear this, i you who trample on the needy
and bring the poor of the land to an end,
5[†] saying, “When will j the new moon be over,
that we may sell grain?
And k the Sabbath,
that we may offer wheat for sale,
that we may make l the ephah small and the shekel [4] great
and deal deceitfully with false balances,
6 that we may buy the poor for m silver
and the needy for a pair of sandals
and sell the chaff of the wheat?”
7 The LORD has sworn by n the pride of Jacob:
“Surely o I will never forget any of their deeds.
8 p Shall not the land tremble on this account,
and everyone mourn who dwells in it,
q and all of it rise like the Nile,
and be tossed about r and sink again, like the Nile of Egypt?”
9[†] “And on that day,” declares the Lord GOD,
s “I will make the sun go down at noon
and darken the earth in broad daylight.
10 t I will turn your feasts into mourning
and all your songs into lamentation;
u I will bring sackcloth on every waist
u and baldness on every head;
v I will make it like the mourning for an only son
and the end of it like a bitter day.
11[†] “Behold, the days are coming,” declares the Lord GOD,
“when w I will send a famine on the land—
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water,
x but of hearing the words of the LORD.
12
x They shall wander from sea to sea,
and from north to east;
they shall run to and fro, to seek the word of the LORD,
y but they shall not find it.
13[†] z “In that day the lovely virgins and the young men
shall a faint for thirst.
14 Those who swear by b the Guilt of Samaria,
and say, ‘As your god lives, O Dan,’
and, ‘As c the Way of d Beersheba lives,’
they shall fall, and never rise again.”
The Destruction of Israel