AMOS 4 [†] “Hear this word, h you cows of Bashan,
who are i on the mountain of Samaria,
j who oppress the poor, j who crush the needy,
who say to your husbands, ‘Bring, that we may drink!’
2[†] k The Lord GOD has sworn by his holiness
that, behold, the days are coming upon you,
l when they shall take you away with hooks,
l even the last of you with fishhooks.
3 m And you shall go out through the breaches,
each one straight ahead;
and you shall be cast out into Harmon,”
declares the LORD.
4[†] n “Come to Bethel, and transgress;
to o Gilgal, and multiply transgression;
n bring your p sacrifices every morning,
your tithes every three days;
5 offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving of q that which is leavened,
and proclaim r freewill offerings, publish them;
s for so you love to do, O people of Israel!”
declares the Lord GOD.
Israel Has Not Returned to the LORD
6[†] “I gave you cleanness of teeth in all your cities,
and t lack of bread in all your places,
u yet you did not return to me,”
declares the LORD.
7 “I also v withheld the rain from you
when there were yet three months to the harvest;
w I would send rain on one city,
and send no rain on another city;
one field would have rain,
and the field on which it did not rain would wither;
8 so two or three cities x would wander to another city
to drink water, and would not be satisfied;
u yet you did not return to me,”
declares the LORD.
9 y “I struck you with blight and mildew;
your many gardens and your vineyards,
your fig trees and your olive trees z the locust devoured;
u yet you did not return to me,”
declares the LORD.
10 “I sent among you a pestilence a after the manner of Egypt;
I killed your young men with the sword,
and b carried away your horses, [1]
and c I made the stench of your camp go up into your nostrils;
u yet you did not return to me,”
declares the LORD.
11 “I overthrew some of you,
d as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah,
and you were e as a brand [2] plucked out of the burning;
u yet you did not return to me,”
declares the LORD.
12 “Therefore thus I will do to you, O Israel;
because I will do this to you,
prepare to meet your God, O Israel!”
13[†] For behold, f he who forms the mountains and creates the wind,
and g declares to man what is his thought,
h who makes the morning darkness,
and i treads on the heights of the earth—
j the LORD, the God of hosts, is his name!
Seek the LORD and Live