AMOS 5 [†]Hear this word that I k take up over you in lamentation, O house
of Israel:
2[†] “Fallen, no more to rise,
is l the virgin Israel;
forsaken on her land,
with none to raise her up.”
3For thus says the Lord GOD:
“The city that went out a thousand
shall have a hundred left,
and that which went out a hundred
shall have ten left
to the house of Israel.”
4For thus says the LORD to the house of Israel:
m “Seek me and live;
5[†] but do not seek n Bethel,
and do not enter into n Gilgal
or cross over to o Beersheba;
for n Gilgal shall surely go into exile,
and n Bethel shall come to nothing.”
6 m Seek the LORD and live,
p lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph,
and it devour, with none to quench it for n Bethel,
7[†] O q you who turn justice to wormwood [1]
and cast down righteousness to the earth!
8[†] He who made the r Pleiades and Orion,
and turns deep darkness into the morning
and s darkens the day into night,
who t calls for the waters of the sea
t and pours them out on the surface of the earth,
u the LORD is his name;
9 v who makes destruction flash forth against the strong,
so that destruction comes upon the fortress.
10[†] w They hate him who reproves x in the gate,
and they y abhor him who speaks the truth.
11 Therefore because you z trample on [2] the poor
and you exact taxes of grain from him,
a you have built houses of hewn stone,
but you shall not dwell in them;
a you have planted pleasant vineyards,
but you shall not drink their wine.
12 For I know how many are your transgressions
and how great are your sins—
you who afflict the righteous, who b take a bribe,
and c turn aside the needy x in the gate.
13 Therefore he who is prudent will d keep silent in such a time,
e for it is an evil time.
14[†] f Seek good, and not evil,
that you may live;
and so the LORD, g the God of hosts, will be with you,
as you have said.
15 h Hate evil, and love good,
and establish justice x in the gate;
i it may be that the LORD, the God of hosts,
will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph.
16[†]Therefore thus says the LORD, g the God of hosts, the Lord:
“In all the squares j there shall be wailing,
and in all the streets they shall say, ‘Alas! Alas!’
They shall call the farmers to mourning
and j to wailing those who are skilled in lamentation,
17 and in all vineyards there shall be wailing,
for k I will pass through your midst,”
says the LORD.
Let Justice Roll Down
18[†] Woe to you who desire l the day of the LORD!
Why would you have the day of the LORD?
m It is darkness, and not light,
19
n as if a man fled from a lion,
and a bear met him,
or went into the house and leaned his hand against the wall,
and a serpent bit him.
20 m Is not the day of the LORD darkness, and not light,
and gloom with no brightness in it?
21[†] o “I hate, I despise your feasts,
and I take no delight in your solemn assemblies.
22[†] p Even though you offer me your burnt offerings and grain
offerings,
I will not accept them;
and the peace offerings of your fattened animals,
I will not look upon them.
23 Take away from me the noise of your songs;
to q the melody of your harps I will not listen.
24 But let justice roll down like waters,
and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.
25 r “Did you bring to me sacrifices and offerings during the forty years in
the wilderness, O house of Israel? 26 s You t shall take up Sikkuth your king,
and Kiyyun your star-god—your images that you made for yourselves,
27[†] u and I will send you into exile beyond Damascus,” says the LORD,
whose name is g the God of hosts.
Woe to Those at Ease in Zion