AMOS 9 [†]I saw the Lord standing beside [1] the altar, and he said:
e “Strike the capitals until e the thresholds f shake,
g and shatter them on the heads of all the people; [2]
and those who are left of them I will kill with the sword;
h not one of them shall flee away;
not one of them shall escape.
2[†] i “If they dig into Sheol,
from there shall my hand take them;
i if they climb up to heaven,
from there I will bring them down.
3 If they hide themselves on j the top of Carmel,
from there I will search them out and take them;
k and if they hide from my sight at the bottom of the sea,
there I will command the serpent, and it shall bite them.
4
l And if they go into captivity before their enemies,
there I will command the sword, and it shall kill them;
m and I will fix my eyes upon them
for evil and not for good.”
5 The Lord GOD of hosts,
he who touches the earth and n it melts,
and all who dwell in it mourn,
o and all of it rises like the Nile,
o and sinks again, like the Nile of Egypt;
6
p who builds his upper chambers in the heavens
and founds his vault upon the earth;
q who calls for the waters of the sea
and pours them out upon the surface of the earth—
r the LORD is his name.
7[†] “Are you not like s the Cushites to me,
O people of Israel?” declares the LORD.
t “Did I not bring up Israel from the land of Egypt,
and u the Philistines from v Caphtor and the Syrians from w Kir?
8 Behold, x the eyes of the Lord GOD are upon the sinful kingdom,
and I will destroy it from the surface of the ground,
y except that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob,”
declares the LORD.
9 “For behold, I will command,
z and shake the house of Israel among all the nations
as one shakes with a sieve,
but no pebble shall fall to the earth.
10 All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword,
who say, a ‘Disaster shall not overtake or meet us.’
The Restoration of Israel
11[†] “In that day b I will raise up
the booth of David that is fallen
and repair its breaches,
and raise up its ruins
and rebuild it as in the days of old,
12[†] c that they may possess the remnant of Edom
and d all the nations who are called by my name,” [3]
declares the LORD who does this.
13[†] “Behold, the days are coming,” declares the LORD,
e “when the plowman shall overtake the reaper
and the treader of grapes him who sows the seed;
f the mountains shall drip sweet wine,
and all the hills shall flow with it.
14 g I will restore the fortunes of my people Israel,
and h they shall rebuild the ruined cities and inhabit them;
i they shall plant vineyards and drink their wine,
and they shall make gardens and eat their fruit.
15 j I will plant them on their land,
k and they shall never again be uprooted
out of the land l that I have given them,”
says the LORD your God.
Study Notes for Amos
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:1 Superscription. The first verse identifies the book’s
speaker, audience, and time frame. Amos addresses Israel during the time
covered in 2 Kings 14:23–15:7. This is the period between the beginning
of the reign of Jeroboam II (796 B.C.) and the death of Uzziah (739). More
specifically, it is two years before the earthquake (Amos 1:1).
Zechariah, like Amos, mentions an earthquake “in the days of Uzziah king
of Judah” (Zech. 14:5). This statement is significant because it emphasizes
the historical reliability of the book and its message. Shepherds were near
the bottom of the social order, and yet God chose Amos to prophesy
against Israel’s wealthy, unbelieving leaders. (See, however, the esv
footnote. If Amos was in fact a “sheep breeder,” he may have been a
prosperous businessman.) Tekoa was a small village southeast of
Bethlehem in Judah.
FACT
Earthquakes were a very real danger in ancient Palestine, as is true around
much of the earth today. The Jordan River Valley runs along the northern
end of the famous Great Rift Valley, which extends all the way to the
southernmost part of Africa. Earthquakes occur all along this valley. The
findings of archaeologists suggest that the earthquake mentioned in 1:1
was one that the Israelites would not have soon forgotten.
1:2–6:14 Oracles of Judgment. Amos delivers a series of messages
from God showing that neither Israel’s neighbors (1:2–2:5) nor Israel
herself (2:6–6:14) can escape the consequences of their actions.
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:2–2:5 At this time the area now called Palestine was
inhabited by seven other small nations besides Israel. All of them were in
danger because of Assyria’s push toward Egypt. But Amos showed that what
was about to befall them would not come from Assyria but from the Creator
of all the earth. These judgments on Israel’s Gentile neighbors are a
reminder that God’s moral standards are not merely for Jewish or Christian
people but for all people, whether they have them in written form or simply
written in their hearts and consciences (see Rom. 1:18–32; 2:14–15).
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:2 Despite Israel’s rejection of Jerusalem as the only
appropriate place of worship, that was still the place from which God’s voice
of judgment issued to all the earth. Carmel. Perhaps an allusion to the
encounter between the Lord and Baal, when the Lord struck the top of
Mount Carmel with fire, demonstrating that he alone is God (1 Kings 18:36–
39).
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:3 three transgressions . . . four. This poetic device
expresses totality (compare Prov. 30:15, 18, 21). It introduces the judgment
on all seven neighboring nations (Amos 1:6, 9, 11, 13; 2:1, 4), and upon
Israel as well (2:6). One way of separating grain kernels from their hulls was
to put all the grain in a pile and then have oxen pull threshing sledges of
iron around on the pile. Amos says Syria has treated the people of Gilead as
though they were nothing but a pile of grain, crushing them into the ground.
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:4 Ben-hadad, son of Hazael, was king of Syria at the
beginning of the eighth century B.C. (see 2 Kings 13:24). Fire is the means of
judgment on these seven nations.
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:5 The wooden city gates were fastened shut with a heavy
wooden gate-bar across them. If that bar were broken, an invading army
could enter the city. Kir is the ancestral home of the Syrians (9:7). It is
probably somewhere to the northeast of Mesopotamia. Thus they were being
sent back as a conquered people to where they started.
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:6–8 All the five cities of the Philistines except Gath are
named in this judgment oracle. Rule of the region went back and forth
among the five cities depending on which ruler happened to be strongest at
the time. Philistia was southwest of Jerusalem, on the Mediterranean coast.
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:6 they carried . . . to Edom. It is not known precisely
what event this refers to. It may be a prediction of Jerusalem’s fall to
Babylon in 586 B.C., when Edom actively helped the Babylonians subdue
Judah (see Obad. 12–14). This would then mean that the Philistines were the
Edomites’ partners in that. But more probably it refers to something that had
taken place in Amos’s lifetime in the continuing struggles between the
Judeans and the Philistines (see 2 Chron. 26:6–7).
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:9–10 Tyre was northwest of Israel, on the Mediterranean
coast. With its fine harbor and easily defended island fortress, it dominated
the sea trade of the eastern Mediterranean (see Isaiah 23; Ezekiel 26–28).
Tyre is accused of the same act as the Philistines (Amos 1:6), but it was
more terrible in their case because it involved the betrayal of a covenant of
brotherhood. This may refer to the covenant between Solomon and Hiram
(1 Kings 5:12), or perhaps to that between Ahab and Eshbaal of Sidon (1
Kings 16:31).
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:11–12 Edom was southeast of Judah, around the southern
end of the Dead Sea. Descended from Esau, the Edomites were longtime
enemies of Israel (Num. 20:14–21). Here Edom is judged for its
mercilessness and anger.
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:13–15 The Ammonites lived east of the Jordan River
between Syria to the north and Moab to the south. Their territory did not
extend all the way west to the Jordan, so they were in constant conflict with
the tribes of Reuben and Gad in an effort to extend their border westward to
gain control of the desirable region of Gilead where the two Israelite tribes
lived. The sin of the Ammonites was the viciousness and brutality of their
attacks, without pity even for pregnant women. Ammon’s capital city of
Rabbah (see Deut. 3:11) is present-day Amman, Jordan.
AMOS—NOTE ON 1:15 exile. When Assyria conquered a nation, they deported
the leadership and imported people from elsewhere into the area. This was
done to discourage rebellion by the conquered people and to minimize the
differences throughout their diverse empire.
AMOS—NOTE ON 2:1–3 Moab was Ammon’s neighbor to the south, perhaps
included here because Moab and Ammon were both descended from Lot
through his daughters (Gen. 19:37–38). Moab’s sin was against neither Israel
nor Judah but its southern neighbor Edom. This shows that these judgments
are based not on ethnicity but on the universal justice of God.
FACT
Amos begins with judgments from the Lord on Israel’s neighboring
nations: Damascus (Syria), Gaza (Philistia), Tyre (Phoenicia), Edom,
Ammon, and Moab (1:2–2:5). God holds all nations accountable for their
actions.
AMOS—NOTE ON 2:4–5 Unlike the other nations, Judah is not judged for
inhumanity to others. It is judged according to the law of the LORD (Ex.
24:8).
AMOS—NOTE ON 2:6–6:14 In the introduction to this section (2:6–16), Amos
shows that Israel, far from being better than its neighbors, is even more
worthy of condemnation. This is followed by four extended addresses: 3:1–
15; 4:1–13; 5:1–17; and 5:18–6:14.
AMOS—NOTE ON 2:6–7a They sell the righteous perhaps refers to giving
false witness for money, but it might also refer to selling into slavery
someone who was in debt for something as insignificant as a pair of sandals
(compare Lev. 25:39–43). Instead of helping the afflicted as the law
commanded (Ex. 23:6–8), the wealthy Israelites were crushing them (see
also Amos 8:6).
AMOS—NOTE ON 2:7b–8 Sexual immorality is an insult to God the Creator
(my holy name is profaned). Garments taken in pledge refers to a poor
person’s cloak that was given to a money-lender as security for a loan. It was
to be returned to the poor person at night, since he or she probably had no
other covering (Ex. 22:26).
AMOS—NOTE ON 2:14–15 The swift will not be able to run away from
coming destruction, and the strong and mighty warrior will not be able to
withstand it.
AMOS—NOTE ON 3:1–2 Hear this word introduces the first three messages
against Israel (3:1; 4:1; 5:1). Israel and Judah believed that their role as
God’s chosen people would protect them from harm (see note on 5:18–20).
Amos says the very opposite is true. Precisely because God has known
Israel as he has known no other nation, he judges Israelites by a higher
standard (see Luke 12:48).
AMOS—NOTE ON 3:3–8 With a series of questions, Amos shows that disaster
is coming for Israel. In nature, certain sequences of events lead to
predictable outcomes. If a lion roars (vv. 4, 8), then it has probably taken, or
is about to take, its prey. Likewise, since the Lord GOD has announced
judgment, then judgment will surely come.
AMOS—NOTE ON 3:9–11 Israel’s capital city Samaria was a powerful
stronghold. It was on a high hill (mountains), in a place that was easy to
defend. But it was also just off the great highway that connected Egypt with
Assyria. If Samaria fell to the Assyrians, there was nothing to prevent the
destruction of the Philistine cities (represented by Ashdod) and of Egypt
itself.
AMOS—NOTE ON 3:13 The term God of hosts was popular among the later
prophets. “Hosts” here would ordinarily signify troops of soldiers, so the
term expresses God’s unlimited power.
AMOS—NOTE ON 3:14 Bethel was associated with Jacob and his vision (Gen.
28:10–22). It was close to the border between Israel and Judah. Thus,
Jeroboam I chose it as a worship site for his new religion (1 Kings 12:25–
33). Amos chose this as the place to deliver his prophecies (Amos 7:12–13)
because it represented the corruption of the true religion (4:4–5). The horns
of the altar were at the four corners on top of the altar (Ex. 27:2). They
represented a place where God’s protection was available (1 Kings 1:50;
2:28). Now, however, the horns of Bethel’s altar would provide no
protection.
AMOS—NOTE ON 3:15 All of Israel’s social injustice is represented by the sin
of accumulating large amounts of property (see also Isa. 5:8). This violated
the covenant, which said a family’s land was a permanent gift from God to
that family, not to be taken from them. Amos condemns wealth created
through mistreating the poor (Amos 4:1). He also condemns unfair business
practices (5:7, 11, 12; 8:4–6) and living in luxury without caring for the
needy (5:12; 8:4–6). He also notes the lack of concern for sin (6:4–6) and the
lack of true faith (5:21–23).
FACT
The winter house and summer house. Many wealthy Samarians had two
homes. One would be in the warmer, southern regions while the other was
built in the cooler north (3:15). This extravagance made it all the more
obvious that Amos was justified in his criticism of the wealthy people who
ignored the needs of the poor.
AMOS—NOTE ON 4:1–13 This second oracle (see note on 2:6–6:14) is
composed of three parts. In 4:1–5, Amos expands somewhat on the points
made in 3:14–15: the sins of self-indulgence and oppression (4:1–3) and of
false religion (vv. 4–5). In vv. 6–11, the Lord describes all the ways in which
he has appealed in vain for the Israelites to return to him. As a result, they
will come face to face with the infinite Creator in all his power (vv. 12–13).
AMOS—NOTE ON 4:1 Bashan was rich pastureland northeast of the Sea of
Galilee. The cattle there tended to be plump and healthy. Amos compares the
women of Samaria to those cattle. Even women oppress the poor and
crush the needy.
AMOS—NOTE ON 4:2–3 These verses describe what will happen to the
wealthy and self-indulgent women of Samaria (v. 1) when it falls to the
Assyrians. They will be dragged out through the broken-down walls
(breaches) with fishhooks, like a fisherman dragging a fish out of water.
The reference to hooks may be literal. Some Assyrian illustrations seem to
show captives being taken away with ropes attached to rings in their noses.
AMOS—NOTE ON 4:4–5 With bitter sarcasm, Amos criticizes religious activity
at Bethel and Gilgal (see Josh. 4:20; 10:43). Far from securing forgiveness
for transgression, this activity was itself sin! The Israelites might love to
engage in such worship, but it only disgusted God (Amos 5:14–15, 21–24).
The prophets often seem to dismiss sacrificial worship, but the context of
such prophecies shows that they are concerned that all worship be the result
of true faith.
AMOS—NOTE ON 4:6 The people had cleanness of teeth because they had no
food to cling to their teeth! yet you did not return to me. Even though God
had sent various natural and social disasters, the people would not turn back
to him.
AMOS—NOTE ON 4:13 Israel is about to come face to face with the Creator of
the universe, the LORD, the God of hosts (see note on 3:13).
FACT
The blighting of crops (4:9) was a serious problem for farmers because
there was no known way at the time to stop it. Dry winds would blow up
from the Sahara at hurricane-like speeds. These dusty winds sucked all
moisture out of plant life, leaving the plants themselves brown and wilted.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:1–17 Although they face imminent destruction, God still
pleads with his people to return to him.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:1 lamentation. Neither the prophet nor God takes delight
in these messages of doom. Like mourners at a funeral, they grieve at what
lies ahead for the unrepentant people.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:2 Virgin Israel expresses the special value God places on
Israel.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:5–6 Israel should seek the LORD in the ways he has
commanded, not in the pagan practices found at Bethel, Gilgal, and
Beersheba.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:7 For governments, justice involves a just use of power
and maintaining a proper judicial system. For individuals, justice involves
honest business dealings and faithfulness in keeping one’s word. Both
governments and individual citizens should be especially concerned with
protecting the poor and the weak from those with greater wealth and power.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:8–9 Amos contrasts the limitless glory of the Creator with
the things worshiped at the pagan-influenced shrines in Bethel, Gilgal, and
Beersheba.
FACT
Constellations like the Pleiades and Orion (5:8) were important to pagan
cultures, which worshiped them as gods. Images of them could be found
on seals and scrolls throughout the ancient Near East. Prophets like Amos
believed that these constellations were not gods, but rather were evidence
of the scope and majesty of God’s creation.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:10 reproves in the gate. The walled cities of the ancient
Near East had covered gatehouses with multiple sets of gates. If the enemy
broke through one gate, they were immediately confronted with another.
During times of peace, all the gates would be open. The gatehouse would
provide a shady place where the old men of the city could observe events,
and where they could decide the legal cases brought before them. But in
Israel, justice was going to the highest bidder. See also vv. 12, 15.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:14–15 God appeals to his people again (compare vv. 4–7).
In that evil time (v. 13), they should seek good for those around them. If
they do so, there may be hope for the nation, even at that late hour.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:16–17 Although Israel could have returned to God, they
would not. As a result, Amos announces that a great funeral cry of wailing . .
. mourning . . . lamentation (see v. 1) will go up all over the land from the
streets of the cities to the vineyards in the countryside.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:18–6:14 This fourth message (see note on 2:6–6:14) gives
details about the kinds of sins that will provoke Israel’s “funeral” as a nation
(see note on 5:16–17). Three times the funeral cry of “Woe” appears: 5:18;
6:1; 6:4. Each woe introduces another category of sin.
The Day of the Lord in the Prophets
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:18–20 Historically, this is the earliest known use of the
expression the day of the LORD. The phrase also occurs in the prophetic
works of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Joel, Obadiah, Zephaniah, and Malachi
(see diagram). The people of Amos’s day may have used the term to refer to
the time when the Lord would intervene and put Israel at the head of the
nations (possibly based on Deut. 32:35–37). But Amos, and all the prophets
after him, clarify what it will mean for the Lord to visit his people: if they
are unfaithful, it will mean judgment. In Amos, “the day of the LORD” points
to the coming judgment on the northern kingdom (Amos 5:27). In
Zephaniah, it points to judgment on Judah. Other prophets use the term to
signal God’s punishment of other nations. In some cases, the prophet uses
the term to refer to something farther in the future (Mal. 4:5; and probably in
Joel 2:31). All of this indicates that the “day” is not unique but may be
repeated as circumstances call for it. New Testament authors apply the term
to the return of Christ (1 Cor. 1:8; 2 Pet. 3:10).
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:21 God hates Israel’s religious feasts and solemn
assemblies, their offerings (v. 22), and songs (v. 23) because of their
persistent sinful conduct (see note on 3:15). He rejects their perversion of
worship at Bethel (see note on 3:14). He despises the absence of justice and
righteousness in their conduct toward one another (5:24).
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:22 I will not accept them. The Israelites may seem to be
worshiping God, but he knows they do not love and obey him.
AMOS—NOTE ON 5:27 Exile beyond Damascus is exactly what happened (2
Kings 17:6). This is a startling prediction, since Assyria was comparatively
weak in Amos’s time.
AMOS
Amos was a shepherd from the Judean town of Tekoa, a “herdsman and a
dresser of sycamore figs” (7:14). He prophesied primarily to the northern
kingdom of Israel during a time of political stability and great wealth. As
they often did, the people of Israel saw this prosperity as a sign of God’s
blessing. But God used Amos to tell them that this was not the case. Much
of the nation’s wealth had been acquired by oppressing the poor, and so
their insincere worship was disgusting to God. Israel had rejected its
calling to be a place where God’s righteousness and justice was
demonstrated to the world. Because of their unfaithfulness, the Israelites
would be punished severely. God would remain faithful to his people,
however, and would restore what had been destroyed. Peace and blessing
would come to Israel—and the world—through the coming of the
Messiah. (Amos 5:18–24)
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:1 Amos included the Judeans in his warning (see 2:4–5).
Both Zion (Jerusalem, the capital of Judah) and Samaria (the capital of
Israel) were strong fortresses, easily defended. But God’s people should
never be confident in their own power.
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:2 Stronger cities than either Jerusalem or Samaria had
already fallen. Among these were Calneh, in south-central Mesopotamia
(see Gen. 10:10); Hamath, in Syria to the north of Israel; and Gath, a
Philistine city southwest of Israel.
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:4–7 Instead of grieving over their sins, the wealthy
Israelites were treating themselves to the very best of life’s pleasures. It was
these people whom the Assyrians would take first into exile (v. 7).
FACT
Only the very wealthy could afford to eat the tender meat of calves from
the midst of the stall (6:4). These animals were set aside from other
livestock and fed a strict diet of the more costly grains like barley in order
to fatten them up. This fattening process ensured that the animals would
bring a higher price when sold at the market.
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:6 Wine in bowls and finest oils are further indications
that all restraint was gone. The wealthy cared extravagantly for their own
bodies but cared nothing for the needs of others. The two main tribes in
Israel were Ephraim and Manasseh, descended from Joseph.
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:8 sworn by himself. See Heb. 6:13.
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:12 Perverting justice and righteousness is as unnatural as
horses choosing to run on rocks or a farmer planting crops on a rock pile.
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:13 Lo-debar and Karnaim were two cities on the east
side of the Jordan. Both cities were in areas that were in constant dispute
with Syria. It is likely that Israel had succeeded in recapturing them from
Syria, and that this was a cause for Israelite self-confidence.
AMOS—NOTE ON 6:14 Amos says the little victories of v. 13 will be nothing
compared to the destruction that is to come. Lebo-hamath was in the far
north, in the valley between the Lebanon and the Anti-Lebanon Mountains.
The Brook of the Arabah is in the valley in the far south between the Dead
Sea and the Gulf of Aqaba. The Assyrian conquest would cover the whole
land, not just a few isolated cities.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:1–9:15 Visions of Judgment. In the final section of the
book, Amos turns from speech to sight. He tells of visions he has received
from God that confirm the nation’s situation. The first is a vision of
inescapable judgment (7:1–9). This vision is frighteningly confirmed by the
prophet’s experience with the priest of Bethel (7:10–17). The second vision
is of Israel’s terrible end (8:1–14). The last is of the Lord standing at the altar
of sacrifice (9:1–15). This vision has two parts. The first continues the theme
of judgment (9:1–10), but the second sounds a note of hope (9:11–15).
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:1–9 God reveals to Amos in three pictures that there is no
hope for Israel. In response to the first two, Amos pleads for mercy for the
nation (vv. 2, 5), and God twice graciously relents (vv. 3, 6). But the third
picture is so convincing that Amos sees there is no hope and therefore makes
no intercession. God has repeatedly shown mercy to his erring people, only
to have them continue in their complacency toward him. Sooner or later,
their time will be up.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:2 please forgive. In spite of the severity of all that Amos
had said, he took no pleasure in the people’s suffering. He pleaded earnestly
that God would show mercy.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:3 The LORD relented. Like Amos, God does not desire to
destroy his people. He is very patient (see Ex. 34:6). He has promised to
relent in response to repentance (see Jer. 8:5–10; compare Jonah 3:10–4:2).
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:7–9 The third picture that God showed Amos was of a
plumb line held against a wall. A plumb line is a string with a weight
fastened to its end. When the string is placed beside a wall and the weight is
allowed to hang freely, it will show whether or not the wall is perfectly
vertical. If the wall is leaning and it is not fixed, it will eventually collapse.
Compared to the Mosaic law, the plumb line according to which the wall of
Israel was built, it is clear that the nation is so far out of line that the
collapse cannot be prevented. Israel is hardened in sin; thus, in this case,
Amos does not ask God to relent.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:10–17 If the plumb line according to which Israel was
constructed was the Law, then the priesthood should have held Israel
accountable to it (Deut. 33:10; Mal. 2:6–7). But the priesthood itself was
corrupt (see 1 Kings 12:31 for how the first King Jeroboam had ruined the
priesthood for the northern kingdom). Thus, there was no external standard
being applied by which Israel’s true condition could be recognized and
corrected. The end truly was at hand.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:10 The reference to Amaziah the priest shows that a
representative of the established religious leadership opposed Amos’s
prophecies. Amaziah’s words to the king (Amos has conspired against
you) were a lie.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:12–13 When Amaziah called Amos a seer, his intent may
have been to show contempt. The term suggests, what was true, that Amos is
not a member of the royal guild of prophets, who, since they were paid by
the king, would say only what the king wanted to hear. Thus Amos had no
standing in the king’s sanctuary.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:15 the LORD took me . . . the LORD said to me. Amos
was prophesying on God’s authority.
AMOS—NOTE ON 7:17 All the honor that Amaziah prized so highly would be
taken from him. These terrible punishments would happen because he
rejected God’s word through Amos.
AMOS—NOTE ON 8:1–14 In powerful word-pictures, Amos describes the final
end of Israel.
AMOS—NOTE ON 8:1–2 The Hebrew terms for summer fruit and end sound
alike, so this is probably a wordplay. “Summer fruit” signified the last of the
harvest. The long summer of God’s patience has finally come to an end, and
there has been no harvest of repentance.
AMOS—NOTE ON 8:5–6 Real worship of God in the new moon and Sabbath
festivals would have resulted in compassion for the poor and the needy.
Throughout the OT, the false balances used by dishonest merchants are a
symbol of injustice (e.g., Lev. 19:35–36; Prov. 20:10; Mic. 6:10–11).
AMOS—NOTE ON 8:9–10 Israel’s destruction will be so terrible that even
nature will go into mourning, with the sun hiding its face. This is similar to
the darkness that covered the earth when God’s only Son died on the cross
(Mark 15:33). Darkening can serve as a symbol of judgment (Joel 3:15; see
also Rev. 6:12; 8:12).
FACT
The annual flooding of the Nile (8:8) took place from the months of June
to September. Monsoon rains from the mountains to the south would
overflow the banks of the Nile, bringing with it the fertile silt from the
river. Crops could then be sown in October and harvested in February.
This cycle went on for thousands of years until 1970, when Egypt
completed construction on the Aswan High Dam, which captures the
floodwaters for hydroelectric power.
AMOS—NOTE ON 8:11–12 Israel had rejected the words of the LORD from
Amos. They will go into exile, where there will be no word from the Lord at
all. In its absence they will find that the revelation from God had been their
most precious possession. they shall not find it. People who have
repeatedly rejected God’s words will suddenly be unable to find clarity as to
what God is saying.
AMOS—NOTE ON 8:13–14 Israel had depended on their paganized ideas of
Yahweh, represented by the idols at Samaria and Dan, or on the ancestral
tradition of Yahweh at Beersheba (see 5:5 and note on 5:5–6), but they
would find that these pseudo-Yahwehs were no good at all. Jeroboam had
established one of his improper worship sites at Dan (1 Kings 12:29–30).
Since Beersheba was in Judah, it is not clear what its significance was for
the northern tribes. Perhaps they made pilgrimages there, remembering its
association with the patriarchs (Gen. 21:14–19, 31; 26:23, 33; 46:1–5);
perhaps they felt that there was a special power available there. the Guilt of
Samaria. Those who worship anything other than God will be judged for
their unfaithfulness.
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:1–15 This final vision has two parts, one negative (vv. 1–
10) and the other positive (vv. 11–15). God considers worthless all the
sacrifices the Israelites had given in an attempt to manipulate him on their
behalf, while bringing reproach upon his name with their sinful lives.
Therefore God would demand their own lives as sacrifices (vv. 9–10). But
God’s ultimate purpose in judgment is never destruction; it is always
restoration. So vv. 11–15 depict a day when Israel, again recognizing David
as its true king (v. 11), would be restored to its land.
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:1 Capitals are the tops of columns, and thresholds are
the bases. Mentioning the two together enfolds the totality of the temple
structure. Revelation 20:11–15 uses this image of no escape to describe the
last judgment.
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:2–3 Two groups of opposites: Sheol (the underworld) vs.
heaven; and Carmel (the mountaintop) vs. the bottom of the sea. In short,
there is no place between these extremes to escape God.
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:7 Cushites (or Nubians), who lived south of Egypt, were
considered to be living at the end of the world. All peoples are under God’s
care.
FACT
The Cushites (9:7) lived in the Sudan region, south of Egypt. As far as the
Israelites were concerned, the land of Cush was located at the end of the
world. Amos mentions the Cushites here to say that even those who live in
faraway places are under the Lord’s providential care.
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:11–15 In contrast to the mighty temple of Israel that God
would smash to the ground (v. 1), the fragile booth of David (v. 11) would be
repaired. The reminder that Israel’s well-being depends on the descendants
of David would come with special force to Amos’s northern audience, who
had rejected the Davidic king. God has committed himself to bless his
people, and eventually the world, through the family of David (2 Sam. 7:15–
16; Ps. 72:17).
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:11 In that day reminds the reader of the day of the Lord
that the Israelites confidently expected. If there was to be punishment instead
of blessing (see 5:18–20 and note), that did not mean it was to be God’s final
word. This time, the day will be a blessing to the people.
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:12 The nations . . . called by my name connects with the
nations described in vv. 7–8. Israel has a special place among the nations,
but it is a place of mission, not simply of privilege. In Acts 15:16–17, James
cites Amos 9:11–12. He understands this passage to indicate that “all the
nations” (that is, Gentiles) are included in God’s blessings, as God had
promised to Abraham (Gen. 12:3).
AMOS—NOTE ON 9:13 When God restores the land, it will be amazingly
productive and will not need to rest for a moment. As soon as the reaper has
harvested one crop, the plowman comes right behind planting another one,
and as soon as someone sows the seed, the grapes grow so rapidly that the
treader of grapes comes to pick the ripe grapes and gather them for the
winepress. This is a beautiful poetic image of a land like the garden of Eden
—with fruitfulness that is free from the curse (Gen. 3:17–19; compare Amos
4:6–10).
O b a d i a h
(return to table of contents)
Obadiah
Introduction to Obadiah
Timeline
Author and Date
Background
Theme
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Obadiah
Global Message of Obadiah
Obadiah in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Obadiah
The Global Message of Obadiah for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Obadiah
Introduction to Obadiah
Timeline
Author and Date
The book of Obadiah records a prophetic “vision” given by the Lord to a
man named Obadiah. The only thing known about this prophet is his name.
The book was probably written in the first half of the Babylonian exile,
after 586 B.C. (when Babylon destroyed Jerusalem) and before 553 (when
Babylon attacked Edom).
Background
The people of Jerusalem experienced God’s judgment (v. 16a) when the
Babylonians invaded and “cast lots for Jerusalem” (v. 11). The Edomites
were descended from Jacob’s brother Esau and were Israel’s eastern
neighbors. They should have assisted Israel during the crisis. Instead, they
sided with the foreign invaders and even took advantage of Israel’s
difficulty (vv. 10–14).
Holy Zion had been defiled, and God’s people were publicly shamed.
Israel was devastated by the exile. Does Israel have a future? Will Zion be
defiled forever? Will the plan for Abraham’s offspring to bring blessing to
the world come to nothing? Will Edom and the hostile nations triumph? Is
God indifferent to all of this?
Obadiah proclaimed God’s word in response to this situation. The
message of Obadiah essentially spells out what Lamentations 4:22
announces: restoration for Zion but doom for Edom.
Theme
Edom, together with all other nations that oppose Israel’s God and his
people, will experience God’s judgment (vv. 1–15). God’s own covenant
people have been judged by their exile already. God will restore them (vv.
16–21). The book ends with the promise of the kingdom of God.
Key Themes
1. Enemies will be put to shame because of their opposition to God’s
people (v. 10).
2. Every proud human effort at security will ultimately fail before God’s
coming judgment (vv. 1–9).
3. God’s justice is strict and fair, with the punishment corresponding to
the sins (v. 15).
4. Reunited Israel will experience God’s deliverance (vv. 16–17), possess
the Promised Land, and defeat and rule over Edom (vv. 17–21).
5. In the future, Yahweh will definitively establish his eternal kingdom (v.
21).
Outline
I. First Announcement of Judgment to Edom (vv. 1–4)
II. Second Announcement of Judgment to Edom (vv. 5–7)
III. Announcement of Judgment, Accusation, and Warning to Edom (vv.
8–15)
IV . Promise of Restoration and Victory to Israel (vv. 16–18)
V . Promise of Restoration and Yahweh’s Kingship (vv. 19–21)
The Setting of Obadiah
c. 570 B.C.
Though various dates have been given for the prophecy of Obadiah, it
was most likely written sometime after the fall of Jerusalem to the
Babylonians in 586 B.C. but prior to the fall of Edom in 553. Obadiah
condemned the Edomites, who were descendants of Jacob’s brother Esau,
for attacking the Judeans during the Babylonian crisis rather than assisting
them.
The Global Message of Obadiah
Obadiah in Redemptive History
When Babylon invaded Judah in the sixth century B.C., Edom, directly to
Judah’s east, sided with the Babylonians and even gloated over Judah’s
destruction (Obad. 12). Since the Edomites were descendants of Jacob’s
brother, Esau, this betrayal by Edom was especially painful to God’s
people. While other prophets condemn Israel for their faithlessness,
Obadiah’s prophecy has nothing negative to say to God’s own people. The
focus is on Edom and the divine judgment that will come upon her.
The prophecy of Obadiah addresses key questions that would have been
raised by God’s people in this tumultuous time of defeat and exile. What
will become of God’s plan and promise to bless all nations through
Abraham and his descendants? Will the godless nations of the world
triumph? Will God’s covenant with his people come to an end? How does
God’s faithfulness to Israel fit with his righteous justice that must be
executed toward a people who have so often proven faithless? The message
of Obadiah is that despite Israel’s sin, God will judge those who afflict his
people (Obad. 1–15) and he will restore his people (vv. 16–18), who then
will be an everlasting blessing to the whole world (vv. 19–21).
From the vantage point of the New Testament era, we can see that the
ultimate way in which both God’s justice and his mercy are vindicated
without compromising either is at the cross of Christ, where God’s justice
was satisfied even as his mercy was most clearly seen. With Jesus Christ,
the kingdom of the Lord was established (Obad. 21; compare Mark 1:14–
15). One day Jesus will come a second time and that kingdom will come in
its fullness (Rev. 11:15; 12:10), and the sinners of all nations who have been
redeemed by the blood of Christ will worship him forever in the new earth
(Rev. 5:9–10).
Universal Themes in Obadiah
The danger of pride. Throughout the Bible we are taught that God opposes
pride but is drawn to humility (Prov. 3:34; Isa. 66:1–2; Luke 1:51–52;
James 4:6, 10; 1 Pet. 5:5–6). Pride was precisely Edom’s problem, as
identified in Obadiah 3–4: “The pride of your heart has deceived you, you
who live in the clefts of the rock, in your lofty dwelling, who say in your
heart, ‘Who will bring me down to the ground?’ Though you soar aloft like
the eagle, though your nest is set among the stars, from there I will bring
you down, declares the LORD.” Pride is a universal human problem, not
restricted to any particular class or ethnicity—indeed, in many ways it is the
root of all human sin (see 1 Tim. 3:6).
Divine retribution. “As you have done,” says the Lord in Obadiah 15, “it
shall be done to you; your deeds shall return on your own head.” It is a
great and glorious truth that the God of the Bible is a God of love (e.g., 1
John 4:16–19). But this must never obscure the equally biblical truth that he
is a God of unswerving justice who will do only what is right and just (e.g.,
2 Thess. 1:5–10). This is a severe and sober caution for those who oppose
the people of God, yet it also gives great hope to God’s people as they
experience affliction of various kinds around the world. Whatever is done to
them by those hostile to the gospel will one day be repaid by God himself.
The universal kingdom of God. The closing verses of Obadiah ring with
the glorious promise of a spreading international kingdom under the people
of God, “and the kingdom shall be the LORD’s” (Obad. 21). The New
Testament and the coming of Christ begins the fulfillment of this promise as
the gospel explodes out from Jerusalem “to the end of the earth” (Acts 1:8).
God’s people, reviled and persecuted both in Obadiah’s day as well as
around the world today, “shall reign on the earth” (Rev. 5:10).
The Global Message of Obadiah for Today
Obadiah provides deep consolation for believers everywhere. As global
Christians suffer “trials of various kinds” (James 1:2), they can rest content
in a God of perfect justice who will not let injustices committed against his
own people go finally unpunished. More broadly, God will act justly toward
those around the world today who spurn the dignity of the unborn or
elderly, or who squander opportunities to defend the helpless.
The kingdom of the Lord prophesied in Obadiah is a kingdom into which
believers have been graciously and irreversibly ushered (Heb. 12:28), under
a king who will never leave them nor forsake them (Heb. 13:5). Yet this is
presently an embattled kingdom. One day, this will not be so. The glory that
is coming on the sons and daughters of God in the new earth will be perfect
and everlasting. Shame, tears, and rejection will be over (Rev. 21:4). Joy
will have dawned. We await that day with eager hope.