DANIEL 8 [†]In the third year of the reign of l King Belshazzar a vision
appeared to me, Daniel, m after that which appeared to me m at the first.
2And I saw in the vision; and when I saw, I was in n Susa the citadel, which
is in the province of o Elam. And p I saw in the vision, p and I was at the
q Ulai canal. 3[†]I raised my eyes and saw, and behold, r a ram standing on
the bank of the canal. It had two horns, and both horns were high, but one
was higher than the other, and the higher one came up last. 4I saw s the ram
charging westward and northward and southward. No t beast u could stand
before him, v and there was no one who could rescue from his power. w He
did as he pleased and x became great.
5[†]As I was considering, behold, a y male goat came from the west
across the face of the whole earth, without touching the ground. And the
goat had y a conspicuous horn between his eyes. 6He came to z the ram with
the two horns, which I had seen standing on the bank of the canal, a and he
ran at him in his powerful wrath. 7[†]I saw him come close to the ram, b and
he was enraged against him and struck the ram and broke his two horns.
c And the ram had no power to stand before him, but he d cast him down to
the ground and trampled on him. And there was no one who could rescue
the ram from his power.
8[†]Then y the goat e became exceedingly great, but
when he was strong, the great horn was broken, and instead of it there came
up four f conspicuous horns toward f the four winds of heaven.
9[†]Out of one of them came g a little horn, which grew exceedingly
great toward h the south, toward the east, and toward i the glorious land.
10 j It grew great, k even to the host of heaven. And some of the host k and
some [1] of l the stars it threw down to the ground and m trampled on them.
11[†] n It became great, even as great as o the Prince of the host. p And the
regular burnt offering was taken away from him, and the place of his
sanctuary was overthrown. 12[†]And a host will be given over to it together
with the regular burnt offering because of transgression, [2] and it will throw
truth to the ground, and q it will act and prosper.
13Then I heard r a holy one
speaking, and another holy one said to the one who spoke, s “For how long
is the vision concerning the regular burnt offering, t the transgression that
makes desolate, and the giving over of the sanctuary and host to be
trampled underfoot?” 14And he said to me, [3] “For 2,300 u evenings and
mornings. Then the sanctuary shall be restored to its rightful state.”
The Interpretation of the Vision
15[†]When I, Daniel, had seen the vision, I v sought to understand it. And
behold, there stood before me one having w the appearance of a man.
16 x And I heard a man’s voice x between the banks of the y Ulai, and it
called, z “Gabriel, make this man understand the vision.” 17So he came near
where I stood. And when he came, a I was frightened b and fell on my face.
But he said to me, “Understand, c O son of man, that the vision is for d the
time of the end.”
18And when he had spoken to me, e I fell into a deep sleep with my face
to the ground. But f he touched me and made me stand up. 19He said,
“Behold, I will make known to you what shall be at the latter end of g the
indignation, for it refers to h the appointed time of the end. 20[†]As for i the
ram that you saw with the two horns, these are the kings of j Media and
Persia. 21And k the goat [4] is the king of Greece. And k the great horn
between his eyes is l the first king. 22
m As for the horn that was broken, in
place of which four others arose, four kingdoms shall arise from his [5]
nation, n but not with his power.
23[†]And at the latter end of their kingdom,
when the transgressors have reached their limit, a king of bold face, one
who understands riddles, shall arise. 24His power shall be great— o but not
by his own power; and he shall cause fearful destruction p and shall succeed
in what he does, q and destroy mighty men and the people who are the
saints. 25[†] r By his cunning he shall make deceit prosper under his hand,
and in his own mind s he shall become great. t Without warning he shall
destroy many. And he s shall even rise up against the Prince of princes, and
he shall be broken—but u by no human hand. 26The vision of v the evenings
and the mornings that has been told w is true, but x seal up the vision, y for it
refers to many days from now.”
27[†]And z I, Daniel, was overcome and lay sick for some days. Then I
rose and went about the king’s business, but I was appalled by the vision
a and did not understand it.
Daniel’s Prayer for His People