DANIEL 7 [†]In the first year of p Belshazzar king of Babylon, q Daniel saw
a dream and r visions of his head as he lay in his bed. Then he wrote down
the dream and told the sum of the matter.
2Daniel declared, [1] “I saw in my
vision by night, and behold, s the four winds of heaven were stirring up the
great sea. 3[†]And four great beasts t came up out of the sea, different from
one another.
4[†]The first was like a lion and had eagles’ wings. Then as I
looked its wings were plucked off, and it was lifted up from the ground and
made to stand on two feet like a man, and the mind of a man was given to
it. 5[†]And behold, u another beast, a second one, like a bear. It was raised
up on one side. It had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth; and it was
told, ‘Arise, devour much flesh.’ 6[†]After this I looked, and behold,
another, like a v leopard, with four wings of a bird on its back. And the beast
had four heads, and w dominion was given to it. 7[†]After this I saw in the
night visions, and behold, a fourth beast, x terrifying and dreadful and
exceedingly strong. It had great iron teeth; x it devoured and broke in pieces
x and stamped what was left with its feet. It was different from all the beasts
that were before it, and y it had ten horns. 8[†]I considered the horns, and
behold, z there came up among them another horn, a little one, z before
which three of the first horns were plucked up by the roots. And behold, in
this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a a mouth speaking great
things.
The Ancient of Days Reigns
9[†]“As I looked,
b thrones were placed,
and the c Ancient of Days took his seat;
d his clothing was white as snow,
and e the hair of his head like pure wool;
his throne was fiery flames;
f its wheels were burning fire.
10[†] g A stream of fire issued
and came out from before him;
h a thousand thousands i served him,
h and ten thousand times ten thousand j stood before him;
the k court sat in judgment,
and l the books were opened.
11[†]“I looked then because of the sound of a the great words that the
horn was speaking. And as I looked, m the beast was killed, and its body
destroyed m and given over to be burned with fire. 12As for the rest of the
beasts, n their dominion was taken away, but their lives were prolonged for
a season and a time.
The Son of Man Is Given Dominion
13[†]“I saw in the night visions,
and o behold, with the clouds of heaven
there came one like a son of man,
and he came to the c Ancient of Days
and was presented before him.
14 p And to him was given dominion
and glory and a kingdom,
that all q peoples, nations, and languages
should serve him;
r his dominion is an everlasting dominion,
which shall not pass away,
and his kingdom one
that shall not be destroyed.
Daniel’s Vision Interpreted
15[†]“As for me, Daniel, my spirit within me [2] was anxious, and s the
visions of my head alarmed me. 16I approached one of those who stood
there and asked him the truth concerning all this. So he told me and made
known to me the interpretation of the things. 17 t ‘These four great beasts are
four kings who shall arise out of the earth. 18But u the saints of the Most
High shall receive the kingdom and possess the kingdom forever, forever
and ever.’
19“Then I desired to know the truth about v the fourth beast, which was
different from all the rest, exceedingly terrifying, with its teeth of iron and
claws of bronze, and which devoured and broke in pieces and stamped what
was left with its feet, 20
w and about the ten horns that were on its head, and
the other horn that came up and before which three of them fell, the horn
that had eyes and a mouth that spoke great things, and that seemed greater
than its companions. 21As I looked, this horn x made war with the saints and
prevailed over them, 22until the y Ancient of Days came, and u judgment
was given for the saints of the Most High, and the time came when u the
saints possessed the kingdom.
23“Thus he said: ‘As for v the fourth beast,
there shall be a fourth kingdom on earth,
which shall be different from all the kingdoms,
and it shall devour the whole earth,
and trample it down, and break it to pieces.
24 As for the ten horns,
out of this kingdom ten kings shall arise,
and another shall arise after them;
he shall be different from the former ones,
and shall put down three kings.
25
z He shall speak words against the Most High,
and shall wear out the saints of the Most High,
and shall think to a change the times and the law;
and they shall be given into his hand
for b a time, times, and half a time.
26
c But the court shall sit in judgment,
and d his dominion shall be taken away,
to be consumed and destroyed e to the end.
27
f And the kingdom and the dominion
and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven
shall be given to the people of f the saints of the Most High;
g his kingdom shall be an everlasting kingdom,
and all dominions shall serve and obey him.’ [3]
28[†]“Here is the end of the matter. h As for me, Daniel, my i thoughts
greatly alarmed me, j and my color changed, but k I kept the matter in my
heart.”
Daniel’s Vision of the Ram and the Goat