DANIEL 9 [†] b In the first year of c Darius the son of Ahasuerus, by descent
a d Mede, who was made king over the realm of the e Chaldeans— 2[†]in
the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, perceived in the books the number of
years that, according to f the word of the LORD to Jeremiah the prophet,
must pass before the end of the desolations of Jerusalem, namely, seventy
years.
3[†]Then I turned my face to the Lord God, seeking him by g prayer and
pleas for mercy with fasting and sackcloth and ashes. 4[†]I prayed to the
LORD my God and h made confession, saying, i “O Lord, the i great and
awesome God, who j keeps covenant and steadfast love with those who
love him and keep his commandments, 5
k we have sinned and done wrong
and acted wickedly l and rebelled, turning aside from your commandments
and rules. 6 m We have not listened to n your servants the prophets, who
spoke in your name to o our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all
the people of the land. 7To you, p O Lord, belongs righteousness, but to us
open shame, as at this day, to the men of Judah, to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and to all Israel, q those who are near and q those who are far
away, in r all the lands to which you have driven them, because of s the
treachery that they have committed against you. 8To us, O LORD, belongs
open shame, to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because k we
have sinned against you. 9
t To the Lord our God belong mercy and
forgiveness, for we have rebelled against him 10 m and have not obeyed the
voice of the LORD our God by walking in his laws, which he set before us
by n his servants the prophets. 11[†] u All Israel has transgressed your law
and turned aside, v refusing to obey your voice. w And the curse and oath
x that are written in the Law of y Moses the servant of God have been
poured out upon us, because k we have sinned against him. 12He has
confirmed his words, which he spoke against us and against z our rulers
who ruled us, [1] by a bringing upon us a great calamity. b For under the
whole heaven there has not been done anything like what has been done
against Jerusalem. 13 x As it is written in the Law of Moses, all this calamity
has come upon us; yet we have not entreated the favor of the LORD our God,
c turning from our iniquities and gaining insight by your truth. 14 d Therefore
the LORD has kept ready the calamity and has brought it upon us, e for the
LORD our God is righteous in all the works that he has done, and f we have
not obeyed his voice. 15And now, O Lord our God, who brought your
people out of the land of Egypt g with a mighty hand, and h have made a
name for yourself, as at this day, i we have sinned, we have done wickedly.
16“O Lord, j according to all your righteous acts, let your anger and your
wrath turn away from your city Jerusalem, k your holy hill, l because for our
sins, and for m the iniquities of our fathers, n Jerusalem and your people
have become o a byword among all who are around us. 17[†]Now therefore,
O our God, listen to the prayer of your servant and to his pleas for mercy,
and for your own sake, O Lord, [2] p make your face to shine upon q your
sanctuary, which is desolate. 18 r O my God, incline your ear and hear. Open
your eyes and see s our desolations, and t the city that is called by your
name. For we do not present our pleas before you because of our
righteousness, but because of your great mercy.
19O Lord, hear; O Lord,
forgive. O Lord, pay attention and act. u Delay not, v for your own sake, O
my God, because t your city and w your people are called by your name.”
Gabriel Brings an Answer
20[†] x While I was speaking and praying, confessing my sin and the sin of
my people Israel, and presenting my plea before the LORD my God for y the
holy hill of my God, 21while I was speaking in prayer, the man z Gabriel,
whom I had seen in the vision at the first, a came to me in swift flight at
b the time of the evening sacrifice. 22 c He made me understand, speaking
with me and saying, “O Daniel, I have now come out to give you d insight
and understanding. 23 e At the beginning of your pleas for mercy a word
went out, f and I have come to tell it to you, for g you are greatly loved.
Therefore consider the word h and understand the vision.
The Seventy Weeks
24[†] i “Seventy weeks [3] are decreed about your people and j your holy city,
to finish k the transgression, to put an end to sin, l and to atone for iniquity,
m to bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal both vision and prophet, and
n to anoint a most holy place. [4] 25[†] o Know therefore and understand that
p from the going out of the word to restore and q build Jerusalem to the
coming of an r anointed one, a s prince, there shall be seven weeks. Then
for sixty-two weeks it shall be built again [5] with squares and moat, t but in
a troubled time. 26And after the sixty-two weeks, an anointed one shall u be
cut off and shall have nothing. And the people of the prince who is to come
v shall destroy the city and the sanctuary. w Its [6] end shall come with a
flood, x and to the end there shall be war. y Desolations are decreed.
27[†]And he shall make a strong covenant with many for one week, [7] and
for half of the week he shall put an end to sacrifice and offering. z And on
the wing of abominations shall come one who makes desolate, until a the
decreed end is poured out on the desolator.”
Daniel’s Terrifying Vision of a Man