DANIEL 1 [†]In the third year of a the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah,
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it. 2And
the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with some of b the
vessels of the house of God. And he brought them to c the land of Shinar, to
the house of his god, d and placed the vessels in the treasury of his god.
3[†]Then the king commanded Ashpenaz, e his chief eunuch, to bring some
of the people of Israel, both of the royal family [1] and of f the nobility,
4youths without g blemish, of good appearance and h skillful in all wisdom,
endowed with knowledge, understanding learning, and competent to stand
in the king’s palace, and to i teach them the literature and language of the
j Chaldeans. 5[†]The king assigned them a daily portion of k the food that
the king ate, and of l the wine that he drank. They were to be educated for
m three years, and at the end of that time they were to n stand before the
king. 6Among these were o Daniel, p Hananiah, p Mishael, and p Azariah of
the tribe of Judah. 7And e the chief of the eunuchs q gave them names:
r Daniel he called Belteshazzar, Hananiah he called Shadrach, Mishael he
called Meshach, and Azariah he called Abednego.
Daniel’s Faithfulness
8[†]But Daniel s resolved that he would not t defile himself with k the king’s
food, or with l the wine that he drank. Therefore he asked the chief of the
eunuchs to allow him not to t defile himself. 9 u And God gave Daniel favor
and compassion in the sight of the chief of the eunuchs, 10and the chief of
the eunuchs said to Daniel, “I fear my lord the king, who assigned your
food and your drink; for why should he see that you were in worse
condition than the youths who are of your own age? So you would endanger
my head with the king.” 11Then Daniel said to the steward whom the chief
of the eunuchs had assigned over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
12“Test your servants for v ten days; let us be given vegetables to eat and
water to drink. 13Then let our appearance and the appearance of the youths
who eat k the king’s food be observed by you, and deal with your servants
according to what you see.” 14So he listened to them in this matter, and
tested them for ten days. 15At the end of ten days it was seen that they were
better in appearance and fatter in flesh than all the youths who ate k the
king’s food. 16 w So the steward took away their food and the wine they
were to drink, and gave them x vegetables.
17[†]As for these four youths, y God gave them learning and z skill in all
literature and wisdom, and Daniel had a understanding in all visions and
dreams. 18At the end of b the time, when the king had commanded that they
should be brought in, the chief of the eunuchs brought them in before
Nebuchadnezzar.
19And the king spoke with them, and among all of them
none was found like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. Therefore
c they stood before the king. 20And in every matter of wisdom and
understanding about which the king inquired of them, he found them ten
times better than all d the magicians and e enchanters that were in all his
kingdom. 21[†]And Daniel f was there until the first year of g King Cyrus.
Nebuchadnezzar’s Dream