DANIEL 4 [†] [1] King Nebuchadnezzar to all m peoples, nations, and
languages, n that dwell in all the earth: o Peace be multiplied to you! 2It has
seemed good to me to show the p signs and wonders that the q Most High
God has done for me.
3 How great are p his signs,
how mighty his p wonders!
r His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
r and his dominion endures from generation to generation.
Nebuchadnezzar’s Second Dream
4 [2] I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at ease in my house and prospering in my
palace. 5I saw a dream that made me afraid. As I lay in bed the fancies and
s the visions of my head alarmed me. 6So t I made a decree that u all the
wise men of Babylon should be brought before me, that they might make
known to me the interpretation of the dream. 7[†]Then v the magicians, the
enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the astrologers came in, and I told them the
dream, but w they could not make known to me its interpretation. 8At last
Daniel came in before me—he who was named x Belteshazzar after the
name of my god, and in whom is y the spirit of the holy gods [3]—and I told
him the dream, saying, 9“O Belteshazzar, z chief of the magicians, because I
know that y the spirit of the holy gods is in you and that no a mystery is too
difficult for you, tell me s the visions of my dream that I saw and their
interpretation. 10[†] s The visions of my head as I lay in bed were these: I
saw, and b behold, a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height was great.
11 c The tree grew and became strong, and its top reached to heaven, and it
was visible to the end of the whole earth. 12 d Its leaves were beautiful and
its fruit abundant, and in it was food for all. e The beasts of the field found
shade under it, and e the birds of the heavens lived in its branches, and all
flesh was fed from it.
13“I saw in s the visions of my head as I lay in bed, and behold, f a
watcher, g a holy one, came down from heaven. 14He h proclaimed aloud
and said thus: i ‘Chop down the tree and j lop off its branches, j strip off its
leaves and scatter its fruit. j Let the beasts flee from under it and the birds
from its branches. 15But leave the stump of its roots in the earth, bound with
a band of iron and bronze, amid the tender grass of the field. Let him be wet
with the dew of heaven. Let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the
earth. 16Let his mind be changed from a man’s, and let a beast’s mind be
given to him; k and let seven periods of time l pass over him. 17The
sentence is by the decree of f the watchers, the decision by the word of g the
holy ones, to the end that the living may know that the Most High m rules
the kingdom of men n and gives it to whom he will and o sets over it the
lowliest of men.’ 18This dream I, King Nebuchadnezzar, saw. And you, O
p Belteshazzar, tell me the interpretation, because q all the wise men of my
kingdom are not able to make known to me the interpretation, but you are
able, for r the spirit of the holy gods is in you.”
Daniel Interprets the Second Dream
19Then Daniel, whose name was p Belteshazzar, was s dismayed for a while,
and t his thoughts alarmed him. The king answered and said, “Belteshazzar,
let not the dream or the interpretation alarm you.” Belteshazzar answered
and said, “My lord, u may the dream be for those who hate you u and its
interpretation for your enemies! 20 v The tree you saw, which grew and
became strong, so that its top reached to heaven, and it was visible to the
end of the whole earth, 21 w whose leaves were beautiful and its fruit
abundant, and in which was food for all, under which beasts of the field
found shade, and in whose branches the birds of the heavens lived—
22[†] x it is you, O king, who have grown and become strong. y Your
greatness has grown and reaches to heaven, y and your dominion to the ends
of the earth. 23[†]And because the king saw z a watcher, a holy one, coming
down from heaven and saying, a ‘Chop down the tree and destroy it, but
leave the stump of its roots in the earth, bound with a band of iron and
bronze, in the tender grass of the field, and let him be wet with the dew of
heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till b seven
periods of time pass over him,’ 24this is the interpretation, O king: It is a
decree of the Most High, which has come upon my lord the king, 25[†] c that
you shall be driven from among men, and your dwelling shall be with the
beasts of the field. You shall be made d to eat grass like an ox, and you shall
be wet with the dew of heaven, and b seven periods of time shall pass over
you, till e you know that the Most High rules the kingdom of men and gives
it to whom he will. 26And as it was commanded f to leave the stump of the
roots of the tree, your kingdom shall be confirmed for you from the time
that you know that Heaven rules. 27[†]Therefore, O king, let my counsel be
acceptable to you: break off your sins by g practicing righteousness, h and
your iniquities by showing mercy to the oppressed, i that there may perhaps
be a lengthening of your prosperity.”
Nebuchadnezzar’s Humiliation
28[†]All this came upon King Nebuchadnezzar.
29At the end of twelve
months he was walking on the roof of the royal palace of Babylon, 30and
the king answered and said, j “Is not this great Babylon, which I have built
by k my mighty power as a royal residence and for k the glory of my
majesty?” 31 l While the words were still in the king’s mouth, there fell a
voice from heaven, “O King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is spoken: The
kingdom has departed from you, 32 m and you shall be driven from among
men, and your dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. And you shall
be made to eat grass like an ox, and seven periods of time shall pass over
you, m until you know that the Most High rules the kingdom of men and
gives it to whom he will.” 33Immediately the word was fulfilled against
Nebuchadnezzar. m He was driven from among men and ate grass like an
ox, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven till his hair grew as long
as eagles’ feathers, and his nails were like birds’ claws.
Nebuchadnezzar Restored
34[†] n At the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted my eyes to heaven,
and o my reason returned to me, and I blessed the Most High, and praised
and honored p him who lives forever,
q for his dominion is an everlasting dominion,
and q his kingdom endures from generation to generation;
35
r all the inhabitants of the earth are accounted as nothing,
and s he does according to his will among the host of heaven
and among the inhabitants of the earth;
t and none can stay his hand
or u say to him, “What have you done?”
36At the same time v my reason returned to me, and for w the glory of my
kingdom, w my majesty and splendor returned to me. x My counselors and
y my lords sought me, and I was established in my kingdom, and still more
greatness was z added to me. 37Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, a praise and extol
and honor the b King of heaven, c for all his works are right and his ways
are just; and d those who walk in pride he is able to humble.
The Handwriting on the Wall