DEUTERONOMY 5 [†]And Moses summoned all Israel and said to them,
“Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the rules that I speak in your hearing today,
and you shall learn them and be careful to do them. 2 x The LORD our God
made a covenant with us in Horeb. 3[†] y Not with our fathers did the LORD
make this covenant, but with us, who are all of us here alive today.
4The
LORD spoke with you z face to face at the mountain, out of the midst of the
fire, 5[†] a while I stood between the LORD and you at that time, to declare to
you the word of the LORD. For b you were afraid because of the fire, and
you did not go up into the mountain. He said:
6[†] c “‘I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
7[†]“‘You shall have no other gods before [1] me.
8[†]“‘You shall not make for yourself a carved image, or any likeness of
anything that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth. 9[†]You shall not bow down to them or serve
them; for I the LORD your God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers on the children to the third and fourth generation of those who hate
me, 10but showing steadfast love to d thousands [2] of those who love me
and keep my commandments.
11[†]“‘You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain, for the
LORD will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.
12[†]“‘Observe the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, as the LORD your God
commanded you. 13Six days you shall labor and do all your work, 14but
e the seventh day is a Sabbath to the LORD your God. On it you shall not do
any work, you or your son or your daughter or your male servant or your
female servant, or your ox or your donkey or any of your livestock, or the
sojourner who is within your gates, f that your male servant and your female
servant may rest as well as you. 15[†] g You shall remember that you were a
slave [3] in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God brought you out from
there h with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Therefore the LORD
your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day.
16[†]“‘Honor your father and your mother, as the LORD your God
commanded you, i that your days may be long, and that it may go well with
you in the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
17[†] j “‘You shall not murder. [4]
18[†] j “‘And you shall not commit adultery.
19“‘And you shall not steal.
20[†]“‘And you shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.
21“‘And you shall not covet your neighbor’s wife. And you shall not
desire your neighbor’s house, his field, or his male servant, or his female
servant, his ox, or his donkey, or anything that is your neighbor’s.’
22“These words the LORD spoke to all your assembly k at the mountain
out of the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the thick darkness, with a loud
voice; and he added no more. And l he wrote them on two tablets of stone
and gave them to me. 23And m as soon as you heard the voice out of the
midst of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, you came
near to me, all the heads of your tribes, and your elders. 24And you said,
‘Behold, the LORD our God has shown us his glory and n greatness, and
o we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire. This day we have
seen God speak with man, and man p still live. 25Now therefore why should
we die? For this great fire will consume us. q If we hear the voice of the
LORD our God any more, we shall die. 26 p For who is there of all flesh, that
has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of fire as we
have, and has still lived? 27Go near and hear all that the LORD our God will
say, and r speak to us all that the LORD our God will speak to you, and we
will hear and do it.’
28“And the LORD heard your words, when you spoke to me. And the
LORD said to me, ‘I have heard the words of this people, which they have
spoken to you. s They are right in all that they have spoken. 29 t Oh that they
had such a heart as this always, to fear me and to keep all my
commandments, u that it might go well with them and with their
descendants [5] forever! 30Go and say to them, “Return to your tents.” 31But
you, stand here by me, and v I will tell you the whole commandment and
the statutes and the rules that you shall teach them, that they may do them
in the land that I am giving them to possess.’ 32[†]You shall be careful
therefore to do as the LORD your God has commanded you. w You shall not
turn aside to the right hand or to the left. 33
x You shall walk in all the way
that the LORD your God has commanded you, that you may live, and y that
it may go well with you, and that you may live long in the land that you
shall possess.
The Greatest Commandment
DEUTERONOMY 6 “Now this is z the commandment—the statutes and the
rules [1]—that the LORD your God commanded me to teach you, that you
may do them in the land to which you are going over, to possess it, 2that
a you may fear the LORD your God, you and your son and your son’s son,
by keeping all his statutes and his commandments, which I command you,
all the days of your life, and b that your days may be long. 3[†]Hear
therefore, O Israel, and be careful to do them, that it may go well with you,
and that you may multiply greatly, c as the LORD, the God of your fathers,
has promised you, in a land flowing with milk and honey.
4[†]“Hear, O Israel: d The LORD our God, the LORD is one. [2] 5[†]You
e shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul
and with all your might. 6And f these words that I command you today shall
be on your heart. 7[†] g You shall teach them diligently to your children, and
shall talk of them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the
way, and when you lie down, and when you rise. 8
h You shall bind them as
a sign on your hand, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes. 9 i You
shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.
10“And when the LORD your God brings you into the land that he swore
to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give you—with great
and good cities j that you did not build, 11and houses full of all good things
that you did not fill, and cisterns that you did not dig, and vineyards and
olive trees that you did not plant—and when you eat and are full, 12[†] k then
take care lest you forget the LORD, who brought you out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
13[†]It is l the LORD your God you shall
fear. Him you shall serve and m by his name you shall swear.
14[†]You shall
not n go after other gods, o the gods of the peoples who are around you—
15for p the LORD your God in your midst q is a jealous God— r lest the anger
of the LORD your God be kindled against you, and he destroy you from off
the face of the earth.
16[†] s “You shall not put the LORD your God to the test, t as you tested
him at Massah. 17You shall u diligently keep the commandments of the
LORD your God, and his testimonies and his statutes, which he has
commanded you. 18
v And you shall do what is right and good in the sight of
the LORD, that it may go well with you, and that you may go in and take
possession of the good land that the LORD swore to give to your fathers
19 w by thrusting out all your enemies from before you, as the LORD has
promised.
20[†] x “When your son asks you in time to come, ‘What is the meaning of
the testimonies and the statutes and the rules that the LORD our God has
commanded you?’ 21then you shall say to your son, y ‘We were Pharaoh’s
slaves in Egypt. And the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
22And z the LORD showed signs and wonders, great and grievous, against
Egypt and against Pharaoh and all his household, before our eyes. 23And he
brought us out from there, that he might bring us in and give us the land that
he swore to give to our fathers. 24And the LORD commanded us to do all
these statutes, a to fear the LORD our God, b for our good always, that c he
might preserve us alive, as we are this day.
25[†]And d it will be
righteousness for us, if we are careful to do all this commandment before
the LORD our God, as he has commanded us.’
A Chosen People