DEUTERONOMY 11 [†] e “You shall therefore love the LORD your God and
f keep his charge, his statutes, his rules, and his commandments always.
2[†]And consider today (since I am not speaking to g your children who
have not known or seen it), consider the discipline [1] of the LORD your God,
h his greatness, i his mighty hand and his outstretched arm, 3 j his signs and
his deeds that he did in Egypt to Pharaoh the king of Egypt and to all his
land, 4and what he did to the army of Egypt, to their horses and to their
chariots, k how he made the water of the Red Sea flow over them as they
pursued after you, and how the LORD has destroyed them to this day,
5and
l what he did to you in the wilderness, until you came to this place, 6[†]and
m what he did to Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, son of Reuben, how
the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up, with their households,
their tents, and every living thing that followed them, in the midst of all
Israel. 7[†]For your eyes have seen n all the great work of the LORD that he
did.
8“You shall therefore keep the whole commandment that I command you
today, that you may o be strong, and go in and take possession of the land
that you are going over to possess, 9and p that you may live long in the land
q that the LORD swore to your fathers to give to them and to their offspring,
r a land flowing with milk and honey.
10For the land that you are entering to
take possession of it is not like the land of Egypt, from which you have
come, where you sowed your seed and irrigated it, [2] like a garden of
vegetables. 11
s But the land that you are going over to possess is a land of
hills and valleys, which drinks water by the rain from heaven, 12a land that
the LORD your God cares for. t The eyes of the LORD your God are always
upon it, from the beginning of the year to the end of the year.
13“And if you will indeed obey my commandments that I command you
today, u to love the LORD your God, and to serve him with all your heart and
with all your soul, 14[†] v he [3] will give the rain for your land in its season,
w the early rain and the later rain, that you may gather in your grain and
your wine and your oil. 15 x And he will give grass in your fields for your
livestock, and y you shall eat and be full. 16[†]Take care z lest your heart be
deceived, and you turn aside and a serve other gods and worship them;
17then b the anger of the LORD will be kindled against you, and he c will
shut up the heavens, so that there will be no rain, and the land will yield no
fruit, and d you will perish quickly off the good land that the LORD is giving
you.
18[†] e “You shall therefore lay up these words of mine in your heart and
in your soul, and f you shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between your eyes. 19You shall teach them to your
children, talking of them when you are sitting in your house, and when you
are walking by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise. 20 g You
shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates, 21 h that
your days and the days of your children may be multiplied in the land that
the LORD swore to your fathers to give them, i as long as the heavens are
above the earth. 22For if j you will be careful to do all this commandment
that I command you to do, loving the LORD your God, walking in all his
ways, and k holding fast to him, 23then the LORD l will drive out all these
nations before you, and you will m dispossess nations greater and mightier
than you. 24 n Every place on which the sole of your foot treads shall be
yours. Your territory shall be o from the wilderness to [4] the Lebanon and
from the River, the river Euphrates, to the western sea. 25
p No one shall be
able to stand against you. The LORD your God will lay q the fear of you and
the dread of you on all the land that you shall tread, r as he promised you.
26[†] s “See, I am setting before you today a blessing and a curse: 27
t the
blessing, if you obey the commandments of the LORD your God, which I
command you today,
28[†]and u the curse, if you do not obey the
commandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside from the way that I
am commanding you today, v to go after other gods that you have not
known. 29[†]And when the LORD your God brings you into the land that you
are entering to take possession of it, you shall set w the blessing on Mount
Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal. 30[†]Are they not beyond the Jordan,
west of the road, toward the going down of the sun, in the land of the
Canaanites who live in the x Arabah, opposite Gilgal, beside y the oak [5] of
Moreh? 31For you are z to cross over the Jordan to go in to take possession
of the land that the LORD your God is giving you. And when you possess it
and live in it, 32you shall be careful a to do all the statutes and the rules that
I am setting before you today.
The LORD’s Chosen Place of Worship