DEUTERONOMY 16 [†]“Observe the i month of Abib and keep the Passover
to the LORD your God, for j in the month of Abib the LORD your God
brought you out of Egypt by night. 2[†]And you shall offer the Passover
sacrifice to the LORD your God, from the flock or k the herd, l at the place
that the LORD will choose, to make his name dwell there. 3[†]You shall eat
no leavened bread with it. m Seven days you shall eat it with unleavened
bread, the bread of affliction—for you came out of the land of Egypt n in
haste—that all the days of your life you may remember the day when you
came out of the land of Egypt. 4
o No leaven shall be seen with you in all
your territory for seven days, p nor shall any of the flesh that you sacrifice
on the evening of the first day remain all night until morning. 5[†]You may
not offer the Passover sacrifice within any of your towns that the LORD your
God is giving you, 6but at the place that the LORD your God will choose, to
make his name dwell in it, there you shall offer the Passover sacrifice, in the
evening at sunset, at the time you came out of Egypt. 7[†]And you shall
cook it and eat it at the place that the LORD your God will choose. And in
the morning you shall turn and go to your tents. 8For q six days you shall
eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be r a solemn
assembly to the LORD your God. You shall do no work on it.
The Feast of Weeks
9[†] s “You shall count seven weeks. Begin to count the seven weeks from
the time the sickle is first put to the standing grain. 10Then you shall keep
t the Feast of Weeks to the LORD your God with u the tribute of a freewill
offering from your hand, which you shall give v as the LORD your God
blesses you. 11And w you shall rejoice before the LORD your God, you and
your son and your daughter, your male servant and your female servant, the
Levite who is within your towns, the sojourner, the fatherless, and the
widow who are among you, at the place that the LORD your God will
choose, to make his name dwell there. 12 x You shall remember that you
were a slave in Egypt; and you shall be careful to observe these statutes.
The Feast of Booths
13[†] y “You shall keep the Feast of Booths seven days, when you have
gathered in the produce from your threshing floor and your winepress.
14 z You shall rejoice in your feast, you and your son and your daughter,
your male servant and your female servant, the Levite, the sojourner, the
fatherless, and the widow who are within your towns. 15For a seven days
you shall keep the feast to the LORD your God at the place that the LORD
will choose, because the LORD your God will bless you in all your produce
and in all the work of your hands, so that you will be altogether joyful.
16[†] b “Three times a year all your males shall appear before the LORD
your God at the place that he will choose: at the Feast of Unleavened Bread,
at the Feast of Weeks, and at the Feast of Booths. c They shall not appear
before the LORD empty-handed. 17Every man d shall give as he is able,
v according to the blessing of the LORD your God that he has given you.
Justice
18[†]“You shall appoint e judges and officers in all your towns that the LORD
your God is giving you, according to your tribes, and they shall judge the
people with righteous judgment. 19[†] f You shall not pervert justice. g You
shall not show partiality, h and you shall not accept a bribe, for a bribe
blinds the eyes of the wise and subverts the cause of the righteous.
20Justice, and only justice, you shall follow, that you may live and inherit
the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
Forbidden Forms of Worship
21[†]“You shall not plant any tree as i an Asherah beside the altar of the
LORD your God that you shall make. 22And you shall not set up a pillar,
which the LORD your God hates.