DEUTERONOMY 3 [†]“Then we turned and went up the way to Bashan. And
e Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle
at f Edrei. 2But the LORD said to me, ‘Do not fear him, for I have given him
and all his people and his land into your hand. And you shall do to him as
you did to g Sihon the king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon.’ 3So the
LORD our God gave into our hand Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his
people, h and we struck him down until he had no survivor left. 4And we
took all his cities at that time—there was not a city that we did not take
from them—sixty cities, i the whole region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in
Bashan. 5[†]All these were cities fortified with high walls, gates, and bars,
besides very many unwalled villages. 6And j we devoted them to
destruction, [1] as we did to Sihon the king of Heshbon, devoting to
destruction every k city, men, women, and children. 7But all the livestock
and the spoil of the cities we took as our plunder.
8[†]So we took the land at
that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond
the Jordan, from the Valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon 9(the Sidonians
call l Hermon m Sirion, while the Amorites call it n Senir), 10all the cities of
the o tableland and all Gilead and all Bashan, as far as p Salecah and Edrei,
cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 11[†](For q only Og the king of
Bashan was left of the remnant of r the Rephaim. Behold, his bed was a bed
of iron. Is it not in s Rabbah of the Ammonites? Nine cubits [2] was its
length, and four cubits its breadth, according to the t common cubit. [3])
12“When we took possession of this land at that time, I gave to the
Reubenites and the Gadites the territory beginning u at Aroer, which is on
the edge of the Valley of the Arnon, and half the hill country of Gilead with
v its cities. 13 w The rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, that
is, x all the region of Argob, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh. (All that
portion of Bashan is called the land of r Rephaim. 14
y Jair the Manassite
took all the region of Argob, that is, Bashan, as far as the border of z the
Geshurites and the Maacathites, and called the villages a after his own
name, Havvoth-jair, as it is to this day.) 15[†]To Machir b I gave Gilead,
16and to the Reubenites c and the Gadites I gave the territory from Gilead as
far as the Valley of the Arnon, with the middle of the valley as a border, as
far over as the river Jabbok, d the border of the Ammonites; 17[†]the Arabah
also, with the Jordan as the border, from e Chinnereth as far as f the Sea of
the Arabah, g the Salt Sea, under h the slopes of Pisgah on the east.
18[†]“And I commanded you at that time, saying, ‘The LORD your God
has given you this land to possess. i All your men of valor shall cross over
armed before your brothers, the people of Israel. 19Only your wives, your
little ones, and your livestock j (I know that you have much livestock) shall
remain in the cities that I have given you, 20[†] k until the LORD gives rest to
your brothers, as to you, and they also occupy the land that the LORD your
God gives them beyond the Jordan. Then each of you may return to his
possession which I have given you.’ 21And I commanded l Joshua at that
time, ‘Your eyes have seen all that the LORD your God has done to these
two kings. So will the LORD do to all the kingdoms into which you are
crossing. 22You shall not fear them, for it is m the LORD your God who
fights for you.’
Moses Forbidden to Enter the Land
23“And I pleaded with the LORD at that time, saying, 24[†]‘O Lord GOD, you
have only begun to show your servant n your greatness and your mighty
hand. For o what god is there in heaven or on earth who can do such works
and mighty acts as yours? 25Please let me go over and see p the good land
beyond the Jordan, that good hill country and q Lebanon.’ 26[†]But r the
LORD was angry with me because of you and would not listen to me. And
the LORD said to me, s ‘Enough from you; do not speak to me of this matter
again. 27
t Go up to the top of Pisgah and lift up your eyes westward and
northward and southward and eastward, and look at it with your eyes, for
you shall not go over this Jordan. 28But u charge Joshua, and encourage and
strengthen him, for he shall go over at the head of this people, and he shall
put them in possession of the land that you shall see.’ 29[†]So we remained
in v the valley opposite Beth-peor.
Moses Commands Obedience