DEUTERONOMY 17 [†] j “You shall not sacrifice to the LORD your God an
ox or a sheep in which is a blemish, any defect whatever, for that is an
abomination to the LORD your God.
2[†] k “If there is found among you, within any of your towns that the
LORD your God is giving you, a man or woman who does what is evil in the
sight of the LORD your God, l in transgressing his covenant, 3and has gone
and served other gods and worshiped them, or m the sun or the moon or any
of the host of heaven, n which I have forbidden, 4[†]and it is told you and
you hear of it, then you shall inquire o diligently, and if it is true and certain
that such an abomination has been done in Israel, 5then you shall bring out
to your gates that man or woman who has done this evil thing, and you
p shall stone that man or woman to death with stones. 6[†] q On the evidence
of two witnesses or of three witnesses the one who is to die shall be put to
death; a person shall not be put to death on the evidence of one witness.
7 r The hand of the witnesses shall be first against him to put him to death,
and afterward the hand of all the people. So s you shall purge [1] the evil [2]
from your midst.
Legal Decisions by Priests and Judges
8[†]“If any case arises requiring decision between one kind of homicide and
another, one kind of legal right and another, or one kind of assault and
another, any case within your towns that is too difficult for you, then you
shall arise and go up to t the place that the LORD your God will choose.
9
u And you shall come to the Levitical priests and to the judge who is in
office in those days, and you shall consult them, and v they shall declare to
you the decision. 10[†]Then you shall do according to what they declare to
you from that place that the LORD will choose. And you shall be careful to
do according to all that they direct you. 11According to the instructions that
they give you, and according to the decision which they pronounce to you,
you shall do. You shall not turn aside from the verdict that they declare to
you, either to the right hand or to the left. 12The man who w acts
presumptuously by not obeying the priest x who stands to minister there
before the LORD your God, or the judge, that man shall die. So s you shall
purge the evil from Israel. 13And all the people y shall hear and fear and not
act presumptuously again.
Laws Concerning Israel’s Kings
14[†]“When you come to the land that the LORD your God is giving you, and
you possess it and dwell in it and then say, z ‘I will set a king over me, like
all the nations that are around me,’ 15you may indeed set a king over you
a whom the LORD your God will choose. One b from among your brothers
you shall set as king over you. You may not put a foreigner over you, who is
not your brother.
16[†]Only he must not acquire many c horses for himself
or cause the people d to return to Egypt in order to acquire many horses,
since the LORD has said to you, e ‘You shall never return that way again.’
17And he f shall not acquire many wives for himself, lest his heart turn
away, g nor shall he acquire for himself excessive silver and gold.
18[†]“And when he sits on the throne of his kingdom, h he shall write for
himself in a book a copy of this law, i approved by [3] the Levitical priests.
19And j it shall be with him, and he shall read in it all the days of his life,
k that he may learn to fear the LORD his God by keeping all the words of
this law and these statutes, and doing them, 20that his heart may not be
lifted up above his brothers, and that he l may not turn aside from the
commandment, either to the right hand or to the left, m so that he may
continue long in his kingdom, he and his children, in Israel.
Provision for Priests and Levites