DEUTERONOMY 21 [†]“If in the land that the LORD your God is giving you
to possess someone is found slain, lying in the open country, and it is not
known who killed him, 2then your elders and your judges shall come out,
and they shall measure the distance to the surrounding cities. 3And the
elders of the city that is nearest to the slain man shall take a heifer z that has
never been worked and that has not pulled in a yoke. 4[†]And the elders of
that city shall bring the heifer down to a valley with running water, which is
neither plowed nor sown, and shall break the heifer’s neck there in the
valley.
5Then the priests, the sons of Levi, shall come forward, for the LORD
your God has chosen a them to minister to him and to bless in the name of
the LORD, and b by their word every dispute and every assault shall be
settled. 6And all the elders of that city nearest to the slain man c shall wash
their hands over the heifer whose neck was broken in the valley,
7and they
shall testify, ‘Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it
shed. 8Accept atonement, O LORD, for your people Israel, whom you have
redeemed, and d do not set the guilt of innocent blood in the midst of your
people Israel, so that their blood guilt be atoned for.’ 9[†]So e you shall
purge the guilt of innocent blood from your midst, when you do what is
right in the sight of the LORD.
Marrying Female Captives
10[†]“When you go out to war against your enemies, and the LORD your
God gives them into your hand and you take them captive, 11and you see
among the captives a beautiful woman, and you desire to take her to be your
wife, 12[†]and you bring her home to your house, she shall shave her head
and pare her nails. 13And she shall take off the clothes in which she was
captured and shall remain in your house and f lament her father and her
mother a full month. After that you may go in to her and be her husband,
and she shall be your wife. 14But if you no longer delight in her, you shall
g let her go where she wants. But you shall not sell her for money, nor shall
you h treat her as a slave, since you have humiliated her.
Inheritance Rights of the Firstborn
15[†]“If a man has two wives, i the one loved and the other unloved, and
both the loved and the unloved have borne him children, and if the firstborn
son belongs to the unloved, [1] 16then on the day when j he assigns his
possessions as an inheritance to his sons, he may not treat the son of the
loved as the firstborn in preference to the son of the unloved, who is the
firstborn, 17but he shall acknowledge the firstborn, the son of the unloved,
by giving him a double portion of all that he has, for he is k the firstfruits of
his strength. l The right of the firstborn is his.
A Rebellious Son
18[†]“If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who will not obey the
voice of his father or the voice of his mother, and, though they discipline
him, will not listen to them, 19then his father and his mother shall take hold
of him and bring him out to the elders of his city at the gate of the place
where he lives, 20and they shall say to the elders of his city, ‘This our son is
stubborn and rebellious; he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton and a
drunkard.’ 21
m Then all the men of the city shall stone him to death with
stones. n So you shall purge the evil from your midst, o and all Israel shall
hear, and fear.
A Man Hanged on a Tree Is Cursed
22“And if a man has committed a crime punishable by death and he is put to
death, and you hang him on a tree, 23 p his body shall not remain all night on
the tree, but you shall bury him the same day, for q a hanged man is cursed
by God. r You shall not defile your land that the LORD your God is giving
you for an inheritance.
Various Laws
DEUTERONOMY 22 “You s shall not see your brother’s ox or his sheep going
astray and ignore them. You shall take them back to your brother.
2And if he
does not live near you and you do not know who he is, you shall bring it
home to your house, and it shall stay with you until your brother seeks it.
Then you shall restore it to him. 3And you shall do the same with his
donkey or with his garment, or with any lost thing of your brother’s, which
he loses and you find; you may not ignore it. 4 t You shall not see your
brother’s donkey or his ox fallen down by the way and ignore them. You
shall help him to lift them up again.
5“A woman shall not wear a man’s garment, nor shall a man put on a
woman’s cloak, u for whoever does these things is an abomination to the
LORD your God.
6[†]“If you come across a bird’s nest in any tree or on the ground, with
young ones or eggs and the mother sitting on the young or on the eggs,
v you shall not take the mother with the young. 7You shall let the mother go,
but the young you may take for yourself, w that it may go well with you,
and that you may live long.
8[†]“When you build a new house, you shall make a parapet for your
roof, that you may not bring the guilt of blood upon your house, if anyone
should fall from it.
9[†] x “You shall not sow your vineyard with two kinds of seed, lest the
whole yield be forfeited, [1] the crop that you have sown and the yield of the
vineyard. 10You shall not plow with an ox and a donkey together.
11You
shall not wear cloth of wool and linen mixed together.
12[†] y “You shall make yourself tassels on the four corners of the garment
with which you cover yourself.
Laws Concerning Sexual Immorality
13“If any man takes a wife and z goes in to her and then hates her 14[†]and
accuses her of misconduct and brings a bad name upon her, saying, ‘I took
this woman, and when I came near her, I did not find in her evidence of
virginity,’ 15then the father of the young woman and her mother shall take
and bring out the evidence of her virginity to the elders of the city in the
gate. 16And the father of the young woman shall say to the elders, ‘I gave
my daughter to this man to marry, and he hates her; 17and behold, he has
accused her of misconduct, saying, “I did not find in your daughter
evidence of virginity.” And yet this is the evidence of my daughter’s
virginity.’ And they shall spread the cloak before the elders of the city.
18Then the elders of that city shall take the man and whip [2] him, 19[†]and
they shall fine him a hundred shekels [3] of silver and give them to the father
of the young woman, because he has brought a bad name upon a virgin [4]
of Israel. And she shall be his wife. a He may not divorce her all his days.
20But if the thing is true, that evidence of virginity was not found in the
young woman, 21[†]then they shall bring out the young woman to the door
of her father’s house, and b the men of her city shall stone her to death with
stones, because she has c done an outrageous thing in Israel by whoring in
her father’s house. d So you shall purge the evil from your midst.
22[†] e “If a man is found lying with the wife of another man, both of
them shall die, the man who lay with the woman, and the woman. d So you
shall purge the evil from Israel.
23[†]“If there is a f betrothed virgin, and a man meets her in the city and
lies with her,
24then you shall bring them both out to the gate of that city,
and you shall stone them to death with stones, the young woman because
she did not cry for help though she was in the city, and the man because he
violated his neighbor’s wife. d So you shall purge the evil from your midst.
25“But if in the open country a man meets a young woman who is
betrothed, and the man seizes her and lies with her, then only the man who
lay with her shall die. 26But you shall do nothing to the young woman; she
has committed no offense punishable by death. For this case is like that of a
man attacking and murdering his neighbor,
27because he met her in the open
country, and though the betrothed young woman cried for help there was no
one to rescue her.
28 g “If a man meets a virgin who is not betrothed, and seizes her and lies
with her, and they are found, 29[†]then the man who lay with her shall give
to the father of the young woman fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his
wife, because he has violated her. He may not divorce her all his days.
30[†] [5] h “A man shall not take his father’s wife, so that he does not
i uncover his father’s nakedness. [6]
Those Excluded from the Assembly