DEUTERONOMY 13 [†]“If a prophet or q a dreamer of dreams arises
among you and gives you a sign or a wonder,
2[†]and r the sign or wonder
that he tells you comes to pass, and if he says, ‘Let us go after other gods,’
which you have not known, ‘and let us serve them,’ 3[†]you shall not listen
to the words of that prophet or that dreamer of dreams. For the LORD your
God s is testing you, to know whether you love the LORD your God with all
your heart and with all your soul. 4[†]You shall t walk after the LORD your
God and fear him and keep his commandments and obey his voice, and you
shall serve him and u hold fast to him. 5[†]But v that prophet or that dreamer
of dreams shall be put to death, because he has taught rebellion against the
LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt and redeemed
you out of the house of slavery, to make you leave the way in which the
LORD your God commanded you to walk. w So you shall purge the evil [1]
from your midst.
6[†] x “If your brother, the son of your mother, or your son or your
daughter or y the wife you embrace [2] or your friend z who is as your own
soul entices you secretly, saying, ‘Let us go and serve other gods,’ a which
neither you nor your fathers have known, 7some b of the gods of the peoples
who are around you, whether near you or far off from you, from the one end
of the earth to the other,
8[†]you shall c not yield to him or listen to him, nor
d shall your eye pity him, nor shall you spare him, nor shall you conceal
him. 9But you shall kill him. e Your hand shall be first against him to put
him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people. 10 f You shall stone
him to death with stones, because he sought to draw you away from the
LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of slavery.
11[†]And g all Israel shall hear and fear and never again do any
such wickedness as this among you.
12[†]“If you hear in one of your cities, which the LORD your God is
giving you to dwell there, 13that certain h worthless fellows have gone out
among you and have drawn away the inhabitants of their city, saying, ‘Let
us go and serve other gods,’ which you have not known, 14then you shall
inquire and make search and ask i diligently. And behold, if it be true and
certain that such an abomination has been done among you, 15you shall
surely put the inhabitants of that city to the sword, devoting it to
destruction, [3] all who are in it and its cattle, with the edge of the sword.
16You shall gather all its spoil into the midst of its open square and j burn
the city and all its spoil with fire, as a whole burnt offering to the LORD your
God. It shall be a k heap forever. It shall not be built again. 17 l None of the
devoted things shall stick to your hand, m that the LORD may turn from the
fierceness of his anger and show you mercy and have compassion on you
and multiply you, n as he swore to your fathers, 18if you obey the voice of
the LORD your God, o keeping all his commandments that I am
commanding you today, and doing what is right in the sight of the LORD
your God.
Clean and Unclean Food