DEUTERONOMY 28 [†]“And q if you faithfully obey the voice of the LORD
your God, being careful to do all his commandments that I command you
today, the LORD your God will set you r high above all the nations of the
earth. 2And all these blessings shall come upon you and s overtake you, if
you obey the voice of the LORD your God. 3[†]Blessed shall you be in the
city, and t blessed shall you be in the field. 4Blessed shall be u the fruit of
your womb and the fruit of your ground and the fruit of your cattle, the
increase of your herds and the young of your flock. 5Blessed shall be your
basket and your v kneading bowl. 6Blessed shall you be w when you come
in, and blessed shall you be when you go out.
7[†]“The LORD x will cause your enemies who rise against you to be
defeated before you. They shall come out against you one way and flee
before you seven ways. 8The LORD y will command the blessing on you in
your barns and z in all that you undertake. a And he will bless you in the
land that the LORD your God is giving you. 9[†] b The LORD will establish
you as a people holy to himself, as he has sworn to you, if you keep the
commandments of the LORD your God and walk in his ways. 10And c all the
peoples of the earth shall see that you are d called by the name of the LORD,
and they shall be e afraid of you. 11And f the LORD will make you abound in
prosperity, in u the fruit of your womb and in the fruit of your livestock and
in the fruit of your ground, within the land that the LORD swore to your
fathers to give you. 12The LORD will open to you his good treasury, the
heavens, g to give the rain to your land in its season and h to bless all the
work of your hands. And i you shall lend to many nations, but you shall not
borrow.
13And the LORD will make you j the head and not the tail, and you
shall only go up and not down, if you obey the commandments of the LORD
your God, which I command you today, being careful to do them, 14
k and if
you do not turn aside from any of the words that I command you today, to
the right hand or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.
Curses for Disobedience
15“But l if you will not obey the voice of the LORD your God or be careful
to do all his commandments and his statutes that I command you today,
then all these curses shall come upon you and m overtake you. 16Cursed
shall you be n in the city, and cursed shall you be in the field. 17Cursed shall
be your basket and your kneading bowl. 18Cursed shall be the fruit of your
womb and the fruit of your ground, the increase of your herds and the
young of your flock. 19Cursed shall you be when you come in, and cursed
shall you be when you go out.
20“The LORD o will send on you curses, confusion, and p frustration in all
that you undertake to do, q until you are destroyed and perish quickly on
account of the evil of your deeds, because you have forsaken me. 21The
LORD will make r the pestilence stick to you until he has consumed you off
the land that you are entering to take possession of it. 22 s The LORD will
strike you with wasting disease and with fever, inflammation and fiery heat,
and with drought [1] and with t blight and with mildew. They shall pursue
you until you perish. 23[†]And u the heavens over your head shall be
bronze, and the earth under you shall be iron. 24The LORD will make the
rain of your land powder. From heaven dust shall come down on you until
you are destroyed.
25 v “The LORD will cause you to be defeated before your enemies. You
shall go out one way against them and flee seven ways before them. And
you w shall be a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth. 26And x your dead
body shall be food for all birds of the air and for the beasts of the earth, and
y there shall be no one to frighten them away.
27The LORD will strike you
z with the boils of Egypt, and with tumors and a scabs and itch, of which
you cannot be healed. 28The LORD will strike you with b madness and
blindness and confusion of mind, 29and you shall c grope at noonday, as the
blind grope in darkness, and you shall not prosper in your ways. [2] And you
shall be only oppressed and robbed continually, and there shall be no one to
help you. 30[†] d You shall betroth a wife, but another man shall ravish her.
e You shall build a house, but you shall not dwell in it. f You shall plant a
vineyard, but you shall not enjoy its fruit. 31Your ox shall be slaughtered
before your eyes, but you shall not eat any of it. Your donkey shall be
seized before your face, but shall not be restored to you. Your sheep shall be
given to your enemies, but there shall be no one to help you. 32 g Your sons
and your daughters shall be given to another people, while your eyes look
on and fail with longing for them all day long, h but you shall be helpless.
33A nation that you have not known shall eat up the fruit of your ground and
of all your labors, and you shall be only oppressed and crushed continually,
34so that you are driven mad i by the sights that your eyes see. 35The LORD
will strike you on the knees and on the legs j with grievous boils of which
you cannot be healed, from the sole of your foot to the crown of your head.
36“The LORD will k bring you and your king whom you set over you to a
nation that neither you l nor your fathers have known. And m there you shall
serve other gods of wood and stone. 37And you shall become n a horror, a
proverb, and a byword among all the peoples where the LORD will lead you
38
away.
o You shall carry much seed into the field and shall gather in little,
for p the locust shall consume it. 39 q You shall plant vineyards and dress
them, but you shall neither drink of the wine nor gather the grapes, for the
worm shall eat them. 40You shall have olive trees throughout all your
territory, but you r shall not anoint yourself with the oil, for your olives
shall drop off. 41You shall father sons and daughters, but they shall not be
yours, for s they shall go into captivity.
42 p The cricket [3] shall possess all
your trees and the fruit of your ground. 43
t The sojourner who is among you
shall rise higher and higher above you, and you shall come down lower and
lower.
44[†] u He shall lend to you, and you shall not lend to him. t He shall
be the head, and you shall be the tail.
45 v “All these curses shall come upon you and pursue you and overtake
you till you are destroyed, because you did not obey the voice of the LORD
your God, to keep his commandments and his statutes that he commanded
you. 46[†]They shall be w a sign and a wonder against you and your
offspring forever.
47 x Because you did not serve the LORD your God with
joyfulness and gladness of heart, because of the abundance of all things,
48[†]therefore you shall serve your enemies whom the LORD will send
against you, in hunger and thirst, in nakedness, and lacking everything. And
he y will put a yoke of iron on your neck until he has destroyed you. 49 z The
LORD will bring a nation against you from far away, from the end of the
earth, a swooping down like the eagle, a nation b whose language you do
not understand, 50a hard-faced nation c who shall not respect the old or
show mercy to the young. 51It shall d eat the offspring of your cattle and the
fruit of your ground, until you are destroyed; it also shall not leave you
grain, wine, or oil, the increase of your herds or the young of your flock,
until they have caused you to perish.
52“They shall e besiege you in all your towns, until your high and
fortified walls, in which you trusted, come down throughout all your land.
And they shall besiege you in all your towns throughout all your land,
which the LORD your God has given you. 53[†]And f you shall eat the fruit
of your womb, the flesh of your sons and daughters, whom the LORD your
God has given you, g in the siege and in the distress with which your
enemies shall distress you. 54The man who is the most tender and refined
among you will h begrudge food to his brother, to i the wife he embraces, [4]
and to the last of the children whom he has left, 55so that he will not give to
any of them any of the flesh of his children whom he is eating, because he
has nothing else left, j in the siege and in the distress with which your
enemy shall distress you in all your towns. 56
k The most tender and refined
woman among you, who would not venture to set the sole of her foot on the
ground because she is so delicate and tender, will begrudge to the husband
she embraces, [5] to her son and to her daughter,
57her afterbirth that comes
out from between her feet and her children whom she bears, because
lacking everything she will eat them secretly, j in the siege and in the
distress with which your enemy shall distress you in your towns.
58[†]“If you are not careful to do all the words of this law that are written
in this book, that you may fear this glorious and awesome name, l the LORD
your God, 59then the LORD will bring on you and your offspring
extraordinary afflictions, afflictions severe and lasting, and sicknesses
grievous and lasting. 60[†]And he will bring upon you again all m the
diseases of Egypt, of which you were afraid, and they shall cling to you.
61[†]Every sickness also and every affliction that is not recorded in the book
of this law, the LORD will bring upon you, until you are destroyed.
62[†]Whereas n you were as numerous o as the stars of heaven, you shall be
left few in number, because you did not obey the voice of the LORD your
God. 63And as the LORD p took delight in doing you good and multiplying
you, so the LORD will q take delight in bringing ruin upon you and
destroying you. And you shall be plucked off the land that you are entering
to take possession of it.
64[†]“And the LORD r will scatter you among all peoples, from one end of
the earth to the other, and s there you shall serve other gods t of wood and
stone, u which neither you nor your fathers have known. 65And v among
these nations you shall find no respite, and there shall be no resting place
for the sole of your foot, but w the LORD will give you there a trembling
heart and failing eyes and x a languishing soul. 66Your life shall hang in
doubt before you. Night and day you shall be in dread and have no
assurance of your life. 67 y In the morning you shall say, ‘If only it were
evening!’ and at evening you shall say, ‘If only it were morning!’ because of
the dread that your heart shall feel, and z the sights that your eyes shall see.
68And the LORD a will bring you back in ships to Egypt, a journey that I
promised that b you should never make again; and there you shall offer
yourselves for sale to your enemies as male and female slaves, but there
will be no buyer.”
The Covenant Renewed in Moab