DEUTERONOMY 14 [†]“You are p the sons of the LORD your God. q You
shall not cut yourselves or make any r baldness on your foreheads for the
dead. 2For s you are a people holy to the LORD your God, and the LORD has
chosen you to be a people for his treasured possession, out of all the peoples
who are on the face of the earth.
3[†] t “You shall not eat any abomination. 4[†] u These are the animals you
may eat: the ox, the sheep, the goat, 5the deer, the gazelle, the roebuck, the
wild goat, the ibex, [1] the antelope, and the mountain sheep. 6Every animal
that parts the hoof and has the hoof cloven in two and chews the cud,
among the animals, you may eat. 7Yet of those that chew the cud or have
the hoof cloven you shall not eat these: the camel, the hare, and the v rock
badger, because they chew the cud but do not part the hoof, are unclean for
you. 8And the pig, because it parts the hoof but does not chew the cud, is
unclean for you. Their flesh you shall not eat, and w their carcasses you
shall not touch.
9“Of all that are in the waters you may eat these: whatever has fins and
scales you may eat. 10And whatever does not have fins and scales you shall
not eat; it is unclean for you.
11[†]“You may eat all clean birds. 12But these are the ones that you shall
not eat: the eagle, [2] the bearded vulture, the black vulture, 13the kite, the
falcon of any kind; 14every raven of any kind; 15the ostrich, the nighthawk,
the sea gull, the hawk of any kind; 16the little owl and the short-eared owl,
the barn owl 17and the tawny owl, the carrion vulture and the cormorant,
18the stork, the heron of any kind; the hoopoe and the bat. 19And all winged
insects are unclean for you; they shall not be eaten. 20All clean winged
things you may eat.
21[†] x “You shall not eat anything that has died naturally. You may give it
to the sojourner who is within your towns, that he may eat it, or you may
sell it to a foreigner. For y you are a people holy to the LORD your God.
z “You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
Tithes
22[†] a “You shall tithe all the yield of your seed that comes from the field
year by year.
23[†]And before the LORD your God, in the place that he will
choose, to make his name dwell there, b you shall eat the tithe of your grain,
of your wine, and of your oil, c and the firstborn of your herd and flock,
d that you may learn to fear the LORD your God always. 24[†]And if the way
is too long for you, so that you are not able to carry the tithe, when the
LORD your God blesses you, because e the place is too far from you, which
the LORD your God chooses, to set his name there, 25then you shall turn it
into money and bind up the money in your hand and go to the place that the
LORD your God chooses 26and spend the money for whatever you desire—
oxen or sheep or wine or strong drink, whatever your appetite craves. And
b you shall eat there before the LORD your God and rejoice, you and your
household. 27[†]And you shall not neglect f the Levite who is within your
towns, for g he has no portion or inheritance with you.
28[†] h “At the end of every three years you shall bring out all the tithe of
your produce in the same year and lay it up within your towns. 29And the
Levite, because g he has no portion or inheritance with you, and the
sojourner, the fatherless, and the widow, who are within your towns, shall
come and eat and be filled, that i the LORD your God may bless you in all
the work of your hands that you do.
The Sabbatical Year