DEUTERONOMY 15 [†]“At the end of j every seven years you shall grant a
release. 2And this is the manner of the release: every creditor shall release
what he has lent to his neighbor. He shall not exact it of his neighbor, his
brother, because the LORD’s release has been proclaimed. 3 k Of a foreigner
you may exact it, but whatever of yours is with your brother your hand shall
release. 4[†] l But there will be no poor among you; m for the LORD will
bless you in the land that the LORD your God is giving you for an
inheritance to possess— 5
n if only you will strictly obey the voice of the
LORD your God, being careful to do all this commandment that I command
you today.
6For the LORD your God will bless you, o as he promised you,
and p you shall lend to many nations, but you shall not borrow, and q you
shall rule over many nations, but they shall not rule over you.
7[†]“If among you, one of your brothers should become poor, in any of
your towns within your land that the LORD your God is giving you, r you
shall not harden your heart or shut your hand against your poor brother,
8but
s you shall open your hand to him and lend him sufficient for his need,
whatever it may be. 9[†]Take care lest there be an unworthy thought in your
heart and you say, ‘The seventh year, the year of release is near,’ and your
t eye look grudgingly [1] on your poor brother, and you give him nothing,
and he u cry to the LORD against you, and v you be guilty of sin. 10You shall
give to him freely, and w your heart shall not be grudging when you give to
him, because x for this the LORD your God will bless you in all your work
and in all that you undertake. 11For y there will never cease to be poor in the
land. Therefore I command you, s ‘You shall open wide your hand to your
brother, to the needy and to the poor, in your land.’
12[†] z “If your brother, a Hebrew man or a Hebrew woman, is sold [2] to
you, he shall serve you six years, and in the seventh year you shall let him
go free from you. 13[†]And when you let him go free from you, you shall
not let him go empty-handed. 14You shall furnish him liberally out of your
flock, out of your threshing floor, and out of your winepress. a As the LORD
your God has blessed you, you shall give to him. 15
b You shall remember
that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God
redeemed you; therefore I command you this today.
16[†]But c if he says to
you, ‘I will not go out from you,’ because he loves you and your household,
since he is well-off with you, 17then you shall take an awl, and put it
through his ear into the door, and he shall be your slave [3] forever. And to
your female slave [4] you shall do the same. 18[†]It shall not seem hard to
you when you let him go free from you, for at half the cost of a hired
worker he has served you six years. So the LORD your God will bless you in
all that you do.
19[†] d “All the firstborn males that are born of your herd and flock you
shall dedicate to the LORD your God. You shall do no work with the
firstborn of your herd, nor shear the firstborn of your flock. 20 e You shall eat
it, you and your household, before the LORD your God year by year at the
place that the LORD will choose. 21 f But if it has any blemish, if it is lame or
blind or has any serious blemish whatever, you shall not sacrifice it to the
LORD your God. 22You shall eat it within your towns. g The unclean and the
clean alike may eat it, as though it were a gazelle or a deer.
23 h Only you
shall not eat its blood; you shall pour it out on the ground like water.
Passover