DEUTERONOMY 4 [†]“And now, O Israel, listen to w the statutes and the
rules [1] that I am teaching you, and do them, x that you may live, and go in
and take possession of the land that the LORD, the God of your fathers, is
giving you. 2[†] y You shall not add to the word that I command you, nor
take from it, that you may keep the commandments of the LORD your God
that I command you. 3[†]Your eyes have seen what the LORD did z at Baal-
peor, for the LORD your God destroyed from among you all the men who
followed the Baal of Peor.
4But you who held fast to the LORD your God are
all alive today.
5See, I have taught you statutes and rules, as the LORD my
God commanded me, that you should do them in the land that you are
entering to take possession of it. 6[†] a Keep them and do them, for b that
will be your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the peoples,
who, when they hear all these statutes, will say, ‘Surely this great nation is a
wise and understanding people.’ 7[†]For c what great nation is there that has
d a god so near to it as the LORD our God is to us, whenever we call upon
him? 8And what great nation is there, that has statutes and rules so
e righteous as all this law that I set before you today?
9[†] f “Only take care, and g keep your soul diligently, lest you forget the
things that your eyes have seen, and lest they depart from your heart all the
days of your life. h Make them known to your children and your children’s
children— 10[†]how on i the day that you stood before the LORD your God
at Horeb, the LORD said to me, j ‘Gather the people to me, that I may let
them hear my words, k so that they may learn to fear l me all the days that
they live on the earth, and that they may teach their children so.’ 11And
m you came near and stood at the foot of the mountain, while n the
mountain burned with fire to the heart of heaven, wrapped in darkness,
cloud, and gloom. 12Then o the LORD spoke to you out of the midst of the
fire. You heard the sound of words, p but saw no form; q there was only a
voice. 13[†] r And he declared to you his covenant, which he commanded
you to perform, that is, s the Ten Commandments, [2] t and he wrote them on
two tablets of stone. 14And u the LORD commanded me at that time to teach
you statutes and rules, that you might do them in the land that you are going
over to possess.
Idolatry Forbidden
15[†] v “Therefore watch yourselves very carefully. Since w you saw no form
on the day that the LORD spoke to you at Horeb out of the midst of the fire,
16beware x lest you act corruptly y by making a carved image for
yourselves, in the form of any figure, z the likeness of male or female, 17the
likeness of any animal that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird
that flies in the air,
18the likeness of anything that creeps on the ground, the
likeness of any fish that is in the water under the earth. 19And beware lest
you raise your eyes to heaven, and when you see a the sun and the moon
and the stars, b all the host of heaven, you be drawn away and bow down to
them and serve them, things that the LORD your God has allotted to all the
peoples under the whole heaven. 20[†]But the LORD has taken you and
c brought you out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, d to be a people of his
own inheritance, as you are this day.
21[†]Furthermore, e the LORD was
angry with me because of you, and he swore that I should not cross the
Jordan, and that I should not enter the good land that the LORD your God is
giving you for an inheritance. 22For I must die in this land; f I must not go
over the Jordan. But you shall go over and take possession of g that good
land. 23[†] h Take care, lest you forget the covenant of the LORD your God,
which he made with you, and i make a carved image, the form of anything
that the LORD your God has forbidden you. 24For j the LORD your God is a
consuming fire, k a jealous God.
25“When you father children and children’s children, and have grown old
in the land, l if you act corruptly by making a carved image in the form of
anything, and m by doing what is evil in the sight of the LORD your God, so
as to provoke him to anger,
26I n call heaven and earth to witness against
you today, that you will soon utterly perish from the land that you are going
over the Jordan to possess. You will not live long in it, but will be utterly
destroyed. 27[†]And the LORD o will scatter you among the peoples, p and
you will be left few in number among the nations where the LORD will drive
you. 28And q there you will serve gods of wood and stone, the work of
human hands, r that neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell. 29[†] s But from
there you will seek the LORD your God and you will find him, if you search
after him with all your heart and with all your soul. 30When you are in
tribulation, and all these things come upon you t in the latter days, you will
return to the LORD your God and obey his voice. 31[†]For the LORD your
God is u a merciful God. v He will not leave you or destroy you or forget
the covenant with your fathers that he swore to them.
The LORD Alone Is God
32[†]“For w ask now of the days that are past, which were before you, since
the day that God created man on the earth, and ask from one end of heaven
to the other, whether such a great thing as this has ever happened or was
ever heard of. 33
x Did any people ever hear the voice of a god speaking out
of the midst of the fire, as you have heard, and still live? 34Or has any god
ever attempted to go and take a nation for himself from the midst of another
nation, by trials, y by signs, by wonders, and z by war, a by a mighty hand
and b an outstretched arm, and by great deeds of terror, all of which the
LORD your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes? 35[†]To you it was
shown, c that you might know that the LORD is God; d there is no other
besides him. 36
e Out of heaven he let you hear his voice, that he might
discipline you. And on earth he let you see his great fire, and x you heard his
words out of the midst of the fire. 37[†]And because f he loved your fathers
and chose their offspring after them [3] and brought you out of Egypt g with
his own presence, by his great power,
38 h driving out before you nations
greater and mightier than you, to bring you in, to give you their land for an
inheritance, as it is this day,
39know therefore today, and lay it to your heart,
that i the LORD is God in heaven above and on the earth beneath; j there is
no other.
40 k Therefore you shall keep his statutes and his commandments,
which I command you today, l that it may go well with you and with your
children after you, and that you may prolong your days in the land that the
LORD your God is giving you for all time.”
Cities of Refuge
41[†]Then Moses m set apart three cities in the east beyond the Jordan, 42that
n the manslayer might flee there, anyone who kills his neighbor
unintentionally, without being at enmity with him in time past; he may flee
to one of these cities and save his life: 43
o Bezer in the wilderness on the
p tableland for the Reubenites, Ramoth in Gilead for the Gadites, and Golan
in Bashan for the Manassites.
Introduction to the Law
44[†]This is the law that Moses set before the people of Israel. 45These are
the testimonies, the statutes, and the rules, which Moses spoke to the people
of Israel when they came out of Egypt, 46beyond the Jordan q in the valley
opposite Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who lived
at Heshbon, r whom Moses and the people of Israel defeated when they
came out of Egypt. 47And they took possession of his land and the land s of
Og, the king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, who lived to the east
beyond the Jordan; 48 t from Aroer, which is on the edge of the Valley of the
Arnon, as far as Mount u Sirion [4] (that is, v Hermon), 49together with all
the Arabah on the east side of the Jordan as far as w the Sea of the Arabah,
under the slopes of Pisgah.
The Ten Commandments