ECCLESIASTES 7 [†] h A good name is better than precious ointment,
and i the day of death than the day of birth.
2 It is better to go to the house of mourning
than to go to the house of feasting,
for this is the end of all mankind,
and the living will j lay it to heart.
3 Sorrow is better than laughter,
k for by sadness of face the heart is made glad.
4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning,
but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
5 It is l better for a man to hear the rebuke of the wise
than to hear the song of fools.
6 m For as the crackling of n thorns under a pot,
so is the laughter of the fools;
this also is vanity. [1]
7[†] Surely o oppression drives the wise into madness,
and p a bribe corrupts the heart.
8 Better is the end of a thing than its beginning,
and q the patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
9 r Be not quick in your spirit to become angry,
s for anger lodges in the heart [2] of fools.
10 Say not, “Why were the former days better than these?”
For it is not from wisdom that you ask this.
11[†] Wisdom is good with an inheritance,
an advantage to those who t see the sun.
12 For the protection of wisdom is like u the protection of money,
and the advantage of knowledge is that v wisdom preserves the life
of him who has it.
13 Consider w the work of God:
x who can make straight what he has made crooked?
14 y In the day of prosperity be joyful, and in the day of adversity
consider: God has made the one as well as the other, z so that man may not
find out anything that will be after him.
15[†]In my a vain [3] life I have seen everything. There is b a righteous
man who perishes in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man who
c prolongs his life in his evildoing. 16[†]Be not overly righteous, and do not
d make yourself too wise. Why should you destroy yourself? 17Be not
overly wicked, neither be a fool. e Why should you die before your time?
18It is good that you should take hold of f this, and from g that h withhold
not your hand, for the one who fears God shall come out from both of them.
19 i Wisdom gives strength to the wise man more than ten rulers who are
in a city.
20Surely j there is not a righteous man on earth who does good and never
sins.
21Do not take to heart all the things that people say, lest you hear k your
servant cursing you. 22Your heart knows that l many times you yourself
have cursed others.
23All this I have tested by wisdom. m I said, “I will be wise,” but it was
far from me. 24That which has been is far off, and n deep, very deep; o who
can find it out?
25[†] p I turned my heart to know and to search out and to seek wisdom
and the scheme of things, and to know the wickedness of folly and the
foolishness that is madness. 26And I find something more q bitter than
death: r the woman whose heart is s snares and nets, and whose hands are
fetters. He who pleases God escapes her, but t the sinner is taken by her.
27[†]Behold, this is what I found, says u the Preacher, while adding one
thing to another to find the scheme of things— 28[†]which my soul has
sought repeatedly, but I have not found. v One man among a thousand I
found, but w a woman among all these I have not found. 29See, this alone I
found, that x God made man upright, but y they have sought out many
schemes.
Keep the King’s Command