ESTHER 5 [†] y On the third day Esther put on her royal robes and stood in
z the inner court of the king’s palace, in front of the king’s quarters, while
the king was sitting on his royal throne inside the throne room opposite the
entrance to the palace. 2And when the king saw Queen Esther standing in
the court, a she won favor in his sight, b and he held out to Esther the
golden scepter that was in his hand. Then Esther approached and touched
the tip of the scepter.
3[†]And the king said to her, “What is it, Queen
Esther? What is your request? It shall be given you, even c to the half of my
kingdom.” 4[†]And Esther said, “If it please the king, let the king and
Haman come today to a feast that I have prepared for the king.” 5Then the
king said, “Bring Haman quickly, so that we may do as Esther has asked.”
So the king and Haman came to the feast that Esther had prepared. 6 d And
as they were drinking wine after the feast, the king said to Esther, e “What
is your wish? It shall be granted you. And what is your request? c Even to
the half of my kingdom, it shall be fulfilled.” 7Then Esther answered, “My
wish and my request is: 8
f If I have found favor in the sight of the king, and
if it please the king to grant my wish and fulfill my request, let the king and
Haman come to g the feast that I will prepare for them, and tomorrow I will
do as the king has said.”
Haman Plans to Hang Mordecai
9[†]And Haman went out that day h joyful and glad of heart. But when
Haman saw Mordecai i in the king’s gate, j that he neither rose nor trembled
before him, he was filled with wrath against Mordecai. 10Nevertheless,
Haman restrained himself and went home, and he sent and brought his
friends and k his wife Zeresh. 11And Haman recounted to them the splendor
of his riches, l the number of his sons, all the promotions with which m the
king had honored him, and how he had advanced him above the officials
and the servants of the king. 12Then Haman said, “Even Queen Esther let no
one but me come with the king to the feast she prepared. And tomorrow
also I am invited by her together with the king. 13Yet all this is worth
nothing to me, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting i at the king’s gate.”
14[†]Then k his wife Zeresh and all his friends said to him, n “Let a
gallows [1] fifty cubits [2] high be made, and in the morning tell the king to
have Mordecai hanged upon it. Then go joyfully with the king to the feast.”
This idea pleased Haman, and he had the gallows made.
The King Honors Mordecai