ESTHER 9 [†] s Now in the twelfth month, which is the month of Adar, t on
the thirteenth day of the same, u when the king’s command and edict were
about to be carried out, j on the very day when the enemies of the Jews
hoped to gain the mastery over them, the reverse occurred: the Jews gained
mastery over those who hated them. 2 v The Jews gathered in their cities
throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus to lay hands on those who
sought their harm. And no one could stand against them, w for the fear of
them had fallen on all peoples. 3All the officials of the provinces and x the
satraps and the governors and the royal agents also helped the Jews, for the
fear of Mordecai had fallen on them. 4For Mordecai was great in the king’s
house, and his fame spread throughout all the provinces, for the man
Mordecai grew y more and more powerful. 5The Jews struck all their
enemies with the sword, killing and destroying them, and did as they
pleased to those who hated them. 6In Susa the citadel itself the Jews killed
and destroyed 500 men, 7and also killed Parshandatha and Dalphon and
Aspatha 8and Poratha and Adalia and Aridatha 9and Parmashta and Arisai
and Aridai and Vaizatha, 10
z the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha,
a the enemy of the Jews, b but they laid no hand on the plunder.
11[†]That very day the number of those killed in Susa the citadel was
reported to the king. 12And the king said to Queen Esther, “In Susa the
citadel the Jews have killed and destroyed 500 men and also the ten sons of
Haman. What then have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces!
c Now what is your wish? It shall be granted you. And what further is your
request? It shall be fulfilled.” 13And Esther said, “If it please the king, let
the Jews who are in Susa be allowed d tomorrow also to do according to
this day’s edict. And let the ten sons of Haman be hanged on the
gallows.” [1] 14So the king commanded this to be done. A decree was issued
in Susa, and the ten sons of Haman were hanged. 15The Jews who were in
Susa gathered also on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar and they
killed 300 men in Susa, but they laid no hands on the plunder.
16[†] e Now the rest of the Jews who were in the king’s provinces also
f gathered to defend their lives, and got relief from their enemies and killed
75,000 of those who hated them, but they laid no hands on the plunder.
17This was g on the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, and on the
fourteenth day they rested and made that a day of feasting and gladness.
18But the Jews who were in Susa gathered g on the thirteenth day and on the
fourteenth, and rested h on the fifteenth day, making that a day of feasting
and gladness. 19Therefore the Jews of the villages, who live in i the rural
towns, hold the fourteenth day of the month of Adar as a day for gladness
and feasting, as j a holiday, and k as a day on which they send gifts of food
to one another.
The Feast of Purim Inaugurated
20[†]And Mordecai recorded these things and sent letters to all the Jews
who were in all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, both near and far,
21obliging them to keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar and also the
fifteenth day of the same, year by year,
22as the days on which the Jews got
relief from their enemies, and as the month that had been turned for them
from sorrow into gladness and from mourning into j a holiday; that they
should make them days of feasting and gladness, days for sending gifts of
food to one another and gifts to the poor.
23[†]So the Jews accepted what they had started to do, and what
Mordecai had written to them. 24For Haman the Agagite, the son of
Hammedatha, l the enemy of all the Jews, m had plotted against the Jews to
destroy them, and n had cast Pur (that is, cast lots), to crush and to destroy
them. 25But when it came before the king, he gave orders in writing o that
his evil plan that he had devised against the Jews p should return on his own
head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows. [2]
26Therefore they called these days Purim, after the term n Pur. Therefore,
because of all that was written in q this letter, and of what they had faced in
this matter, and of what had happened to them, 27the Jews firmly obligated
themselves and their offspring and r all who joined them, that without fail
they would keep s these two days according to what was written and at the
time appointed every year,
28that these days should be remembered and kept
throughout every generation, in every clan, province, and city, and that
these days of Purim should never fall into disuse among the Jews, nor
should the commemoration of these days cease among their descendants.
29Then Queen Esther, t the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew
gave full written authority, confirming u this second letter about Purim.
30Letters were sent to all the Jews, v to the 127 provinces of the kingdom of
Ahasuerus, in words of peace and truth, 31that these days of Purim should
be observed at their appointed seasons, as Mordecai the Jew and Queen
Esther obligated them, and as they had obligated themselves and their
offspring, with regard to w their fasts and their lamenting. 32The command
of Queen Esther confirmed these practices of x Purim, and it was recorded
in writing.
The Greatness of Mordecai