EXODUS 10 [†]Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh, for I have
hardened his heart and the heart of his servants, that I may show these signs
of mine among them, 2[†]and s that you may tell in the hearing of your son
and of your grandson how I have dealt harshly with the Egyptians and what
signs I have done among them, t that you may know that I am the LORD.”
3So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh and said to him, “Thus says the
LORD, the God of the Hebrews, ‘How long will you refuse to u humble
yourself before me? Let my people go, that they may serve me. 4For if you
refuse to let my people go, behold, tomorrow I will bring v locusts into your
country,
5and they shall cover the face of the land, so that no one can see the
land. And they shall w eat what is left to you after the hail, and they shall eat
every tree of yours that grows in the field, 6[†]and they shall fill x your
houses and the houses of all your servants and of all the Egyptians, as
neither your fathers nor your grandfathers have seen, from the day they
came on earth to this day.’” Then he turned and went out from Pharaoh.
7[†]Then Pharaoh’s servants said to him, “How long shall this man be a
snare to us? Let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their God. Do
you not yet understand that Egypt is ruined?” 8[†]So Moses and Aaron were
brought back to Pharaoh. And he said to them, y “Go, serve the LORD your
God. But which ones are to go?” 9Moses said, “We will go with our young
and our old. We will go with our sons and daughters and with our flocks
and herds, for z we must hold a feast to the LORD.” 10But he said to them,
“The LORD be with you, if ever I let you and your a little ones go! Look,
you have some evil purpose in mind. [1] 11No! Go, the men among you, and
serve the LORD, for that is what you are asking.” And they were driven out
from Pharaoh’s presence.
12Then the LORD said to Moses, b “Stretch out your hand over the land of
Egypt for the locusts, so that they may come upon the land of Egypt and
c eat every plant in the land, all that the hail has left.” 13So Moses stretched
out his staff over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind
upon the land all that day and all that night. When it was morning, the east
wind had brought the locusts. 14 d The locusts came up over all the land of
Egypt and settled on the whole country of Egypt, e such a dense swarm of
locusts as had never been before, nor ever will be again. 15They covered the
face of the whole land, so that the land was darkened, and f they ate all the
plants in the land and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left. Not a
green thing remained, neither tree nor plant of the field, through all the land
of Egypt. 16Then Pharaoh hastily called Moses and Aaron and said, g “I
have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you. 17[†]Now
therefore, forgive my sin, please, only this once, and h plead with the LORD
your God only to remove this death from me.” 18So i he went out from
Pharaoh and pleaded with the LORD.
19[†]And the LORD turned the wind
into a very strong west wind, which lifted the locusts and drove them j into
the Red Sea. Not a single locust was left in all the country of Egypt. 20But
the LORD k hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not let the people of Israel
go.
The Ninth Plague: Darkness
21Then the LORD said to Moses, l “Stretch out your hand toward heaven,
that there may be m darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness to be felt.”
22So Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven, and there was pitch
darkness in all the land of Egypt three days. 23They did not see one another,
nor did anyone rise from his place for three days, but n all the people of
Israel had light where they lived. 24[†]Then Pharaoh called Moses and said,
o “Go, serve the LORD; p your little ones also may go with you; only let
your flocks and your herds remain behind.” 25But Moses said, “You must
also let us have sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice to the
LORD our God. 26Our livestock also must go with us; not a hoof shall be left
behind, for we must take of them to serve the LORD our God, and we do not
know with what we must serve the LORD until we arrive there.” 27[†]But the
LORD q hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let them go. 28Then
Pharaoh said to him, “Get away from me; take care never to see my face
again, for on the day you see my face you shall die.” 29Moses said, “As you
say! r I will not see your face again.”
A Final Plague Threatened