EXODUS 29 [†]“Now this is what you shall do to them to consecrate them,
that they may serve me as priests. b Take one bull of the herd and two rams
without blemish, 2
c and unleavened bread, unleavened cakes mixed with
oil, and unleavened wafers smeared with oil. You shall make them of fine
wheat flour.
3You shall put them in one basket and bring them in the basket,
and bring the bull and the two rams. 4You shall bring Aaron and his sons to
the entrance of the tent of meeting and d wash them with water.
5Then e you
shall take the garments, and put on Aaron the coat and the robe of the
ephod, and the ephod, and the breastpiece, and gird him with the f skillfully
woven band of the ephod. 6 g And you shall set the turban on his head and
put the holy crown on the turban. 7[†]You shall take h the anointing oil and
pour it on his head and anoint him. 8Then you i shall bring his sons and put
coats on them, 9and you shall gird Aaron and his sons with j sashes and bind
caps on them. And k the priesthood shall be theirs by a statute forever. Thus
you shall l ordain Aaron and his sons.
10[†]“Then you shall bring the bull before the tent of meeting. m Aaron
and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the bull. 11Then you shall
kill the bull before the LORD at the entrance of the tent of meeting, 12and
n shall take part of the blood of the bull and put it on the o horns of the altar
with your finger, and the rest of [1] the blood you shall pour out at the base
of the altar.
13And you shall take all p the fat that covers the entrails, and the
long lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them, and
burn them on the altar.
14But the flesh of the bull and its skin and its dung
you shall burn with fire q outside the camp; r it is a sin offering.
15[†]“Then s you shall take one of the rams, and t Aaron and his sons
shall lay their hands on the head of the ram, 16and you shall kill the ram and
shall take its blood and throw it against the sides of the altar.
17Then you
shall u cut the ram into pieces, and wash its entrails and its legs, and put
them with its pieces and its head, 18and burn the whole ram on the altar. It is
a burnt offering to the LORD. It is a v pleasing aroma, a food offering [2] to
the LORD.
19[†] w “You shall take the other ram, t and Aaron and his sons shall lay
their hands on the head of the ram, 20[†]and you shall kill the ram and take
part of its blood and put it on the tip of the right ear of Aaron and on the tips
of the right ears of his sons, and on the thumbs of their right hands and on
the great toes of their right feet, and throw the rest of the blood against the
sides of the altar.
21Then you shall take part of the blood that is on the altar,
and of the x anointing oil, and sprinkle it on Aaron and his garments, and on
his sons and his sons’ garments with him. He and his garments shall be
holy, and his sons and his sons’ garments with him.
22“You shall also take the fat from the ram and the fat tail and the y fat
that covers the entrails, and the long lobe of the liver and the two kidneys
with the fat that is on them, and the right thigh (for it is a ram of
z ordination), 23and a one loaf of bread and one cake of bread made with oil,
and one wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before the
LORD.
24You shall put all these on the palms of Aaron and on the palms of
his sons, and b wave them for a wave offering before the LORD.
25Then
c you shall take them from their hands and burn them on the altar on top of
the burnt offering, as a d pleasing aroma before the LORD. It is a food
offering to the LORD.
26“You shall take the e breast of the ram of Aaron’s f ordination and
g wave it for a wave offering before the LORD, and it shall be your portion.
27[†]And you shall consecrate the h breast of the wave offering that is
waved and the i thigh of the priests’ portion that is contributed from the ram
of f ordination, from what was Aaron’s and his sons’. 28It shall be for Aaron
and his sons as a j perpetual due from the people of Israel, for it is a
g contribution. It shall be a g contribution from the people of Israel from
their peace offerings, their contribution to the LORD.
29“The holy garments of Aaron k shall be for his sons after him; they
shall l be anointed in them and ordained in them. 30The son who succeeds
him as priest, who comes into the tent of meeting to minister in the Holy
Place, shall wear them m seven days.
31[†]“You shall take the ram of ordination and n boil its flesh in a holy
place. 32And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram and the
o bread that is in the basket in the entrance of the tent of meeting. 33 p They
shall eat those things with which atonement was made at their ordination
and consecration, but an q outsider shall not eat of them, because they are
holy.
34And if any of the flesh for the ordination or of the bread remain until
the morning, then you shall r burn the remainder with fire. It shall not be
eaten, because it is holy.
35[†]“Thus you shall do to Aaron and to his sons, according to all that I
have commanded you. Through s seven days shall you ordain them, 36and
every day you shall offer a t bull as a sin offering for atonement. Also you
shall purify the altar, when you make atonement for it, and shall u anoint it
to consecrate it. 37Seven days you shall make atonement for the altar and
consecrate it, and the v altar shall be most holy. w Whatever touches the
altar shall become holy.
38“Now this is what you shall offer on the altar: x two lambs a year old
y day by day regularly.
39One lamb you shall offer z in the morning, and the
other lamb you shall offer a at twilight. 40And with the first lamb a tenth
measure [3] of fine flour mingled with a fourth of a hin [4] of beaten oil, and
a fourth of a hin of wine for a drink offering. 41The other lamb you shall
offer a at twilight, and shall offer with it a grain offering and its drink
offering, as b in the morning, for a c pleasing aroma, a food offering to the
LORD.
42It shall be a d regular burnt offering throughout your generations at
the entrance of the tent of meeting before the LORD, e where I will meet
with you, to speak to you there. 43There I will meet with the people of
Israel, and it shall be f sanctified by my glory.
44I will consecrate the tent of
meeting and the altar. g Aaron also and his sons I will consecrate to serve
me as priests. 45
h I will dwell among the people of Israel and will be their
God. 46And they shall know that i I am the LORD their God, who brought
them out of the land of Egypt that I might dwell among them. I am the
LORD their God.
The Altar of Incense