EXODUS 33 [†]The LORD said to Moses, “Depart; go up from here, you
o and the people whom you have brought up out of the land of Egypt, to the
land of which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, ‘To p your
offspring I will give it.’ 2I will send an q angel before you, r and I will drive
out the Canaanites, the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites,
and the Jebusites. 3
s Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey; t but I
will not go up among you, u lest I consume you on the way, for you are a
v stiff-necked people.”
4When the people heard this disastrous word, they w mourned, and x no
one put on his ornaments. 5For the LORD had said to Moses, “Say to the
people of Israel, ‘You are a v stiff-necked people; if for a single moment I
should go up among you, I would y consume you. So now x take off your
ornaments, that I may know what to do with you.’” 6Therefore the people of
Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments, from Mount Horeb onward.
The Tent of Meeting
7[†]Now Moses used to take the tent and pitch it outside the camp, far off
from the camp, and z he called it the tent of meeting. And everyone who
a sought the LORD would go out to the tent of meeting, which was outside
the camp. 8Whenever Moses went out to the tent, all the people would rise
up, and b each would stand at his tent door, and watch Moses until he had
gone into the tent. 9When Moses entered the tent, the c pillar of cloud would
descend and stand at the entrance of the tent, and the LORD [1] would speak
with Moses. 10And when all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at
the entrance of the tent, all the people would rise up and worship, each at
his tent door.
11Thus d the LORD used to speak to Moses face to face, as a
man speaks to his friend. When Moses turned again into the camp, his
e assistant Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, would not depart from the
tent.
Moses’ Intercession
12[†]Moses said to the LORD, “See, f you say to me, ‘Bring up this people,’
but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. Yet you have
said, g ‘I know you by name, and you have also found favor in my sight.’
13Now therefore, if I have found favor in your sight, please h show me now
your ways, that I may know you in order to find favor in your sight.
Consider too that this nation is i your people.” 14And he said, j “My
presence will go with you, and k I will give you rest.” 15And he said to him,
l “If your presence will not go with me, do not bring us up from here. 16For
how shall it be known that I have found favor in your sight, I and your
people? m Is it not in your going with us, n so that we are distinct, I and
your people, from every other people on the face of the earth?”
17And the LORD said to Moses, “This very thing that you have spoken I
will do, o for you have found favor in my sight, and I know you by name.”
18Moses said, “Please p show me your glory.” 19[†]And he said, q “I will
make all my goodness pass before you and will proclaim before you my
name ‘The LORD.’ And r I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and
will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.
20But,” he said, “you cannot
see my face, for s man shall not see me and live.” 21And the LORD said,
“Behold, there is a place by me where you shall stand on the rock, 22and
while my glory passes by I will put you in a t cleft of the rock, and I will
u cover you with my hand until I have passed by.
23Then I will take away
my hand, and you shall see my back, but my face shall v not be seen.”
Moses Makes New Tablets
EXODUS 34 The LORD said to Moses, w “Cut for yourself two tablets of
stone like the first, x and I will write on the tablets the words that were on
the first tablets, y which you broke. 2Be ready by the morning, and come up
in the morning to Mount Sinai, and present yourself there to me z on the top
of the mountain. 3[†]No a one shall come up with you, and let no one be
seen throughout all the mountain. Let no flocks or herds graze opposite that
mountain.” 4So Moses cut two tablets of stone like the first. And he rose
early in the morning and went up on Mount Sinai, as the LORD had
commanded him, and took in his hand two tablets of stone. 5The LORD
b descended in the cloud and stood with him there, and c proclaimed the
name of the LORD.
6[†]The LORD passed before him and proclaimed, d “The
LORD, the LORD, a God merciful and e gracious, slow to anger, and
abounding in steadfast f love and faithfulness, 7
g keeping steadfast love for
thousands, [1] h forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but i who will
by no means clear the guilty, j visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the
children and the children’s children, to the third and the fourth generation.”
8And Moses quickly k bowed his head toward the earth and worshiped.
9And he said, “If now I have found favor in your sight, O Lord, please l let
the Lord go in the midst of us, for m it is a stiff-necked people, and pardon
our iniquity and our sin, and take us for n your inheritance.”
The Covenant Renewed
10And he said, “Behold, o I am making a covenant. Before all your people
p I will do marvels, such as have not been created in all the earth or in any
nation. And all the people among whom you are shall see the work of the
LORD, for it is an q awesome thing that I will do with you.
11[†]“Observe what I command you this day. Behold, r I will drive out
before you the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites. 12
s Take care, lest you make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land to which you go, lest it become a t snare in your
midst. 13You shall u tear down their altars and v break their pillars and cut
down their w Asherim 14(for x you shall worship no other god, for the LORD,
whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God), 15 s lest you make a covenant with
the inhabitants of the land, and when they y whore after their gods and
sacrifice to their gods and z you are invited, you eat of his sacrifice, 16and
you take of a their daughters for your sons, and their daughters y whore after
their gods and make your sons whore after their gods.
17[†] b “You shall not make for yourself any gods of cast metal.
18
c “You shall keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread. Seven days you shall
eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the time appointed in d the
month Abib, for in the month Abib you came out from Egypt. 19
e All that
open the womb are mine, all your male [2] livestock, the firstborn of cow
and sheep. 20The f firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb, or if
you will not redeem it you shall break its neck. All the firstborn of your
sons you shall redeem. And g none shall appear before me empty-handed.
21 h “Six days you shall work, but on the seventh day you shall rest. In
plowing time and in harvest you shall rest. 22
i You shall observe the Feast of
Weeks, the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the Feast of Ingathering at the
year’s end. 23 j Three times in the year shall all your males appear before the
LORD God, the God of Israel. 24For I will k cast out nations before you and
l enlarge your borders; m no one shall covet your land, when you go up to
appear before the LORD your God three times in the year.
25 n “You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with anything leavened,
o or let the sacrifice of the Feast of the Passover remain until the morning.
26
p The best of the firstfruits of your ground you shall bring to the house of
the LORD your God. q You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.”
27And the LORD said to Moses, “Write these words, for in accordance
with these words r I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.” 28
s So
he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights. He neither ate bread
nor drank water. And he t wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant,
the Ten Commandments. [3]
The Shining Face of Moses
29When Moses came down from Mount Sinai, with u the two tablets of the
testimony in his hand as he came down from the mountain, Moses did not
know that the skin of his face v shone because he had been talking with
God. [4] 30Aaron and all the people of Israel saw Moses, and behold, the
skin of his face w shone, and they were afraid to come near him. 31But
Moses called to them, and Aaron and all the leaders of the congregation
returned to him, and Moses talked with them. 32Afterward all the people of
Israel came near, and he x commanded them all that the LORD had spoken
with him in Mount Sinai. 33And when Moses had finished speaking with
them, he put a y veil over his face.
34Whenever Moses z went in before the LORD to speak with him, he
would remove the veil, until he came out. And when he came out and told
the people of Israel what he was commanded, 35the people of Israel would
see the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face was a shining. And
Moses would put the veil over his face again, until he went in to speak with
him.
Sabbath Regulations