EXODUS 3 [†]Now Moses was keeping the flock of his father-in-law, Jethro,
the priest of Midian, and he led his flock to the west side of the wilderness
and came to Horeb, the w mountain of God. 2[†] x And y the angel of the
LORD appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush. He
looked, and behold, the bush was burning, yet it was not consumed. 3And
Moses said, “I will turn aside to see this great sight, why the bush is not
burned.” 4When the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, z God called to
him a out of the bush, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here I am.” 5[†]Then
he said, “Do not come near; b take your sandals off your feet, for the place
on which you are standing is holy ground.” 6[†]And he said, c “I am the
God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob.” And Moses hid his face, for d he was afraid to look at God.
7[†]Then the LORD said, e “I have surely seen the affliction of my people
who are in Egypt and have heard their cry because of their f taskmasters. I
know their sufferings, 8and g I have come down to deliver them out of the
hand of the Egyptians and h to bring them up out of that land to a i good and
broad land, a land j flowing with milk and honey, to the place of k the
Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the
Jebusites. 9And now, behold, l the cry of the people of Israel has come to
me, and I have also seen the m oppression with which the Egyptians oppress
them. 10 n Come, I will send you to Pharaoh that you may bring my people,
the children of Israel, out of Egypt.” 11[†]But Moses said to God, o “Who
am I that I should go to Pharaoh and bring the children of Israel out of
Egypt?” 12He said, p “But I will be with you, and this shall be the sign for
you, that I have sent you: when you have brought the people out of Egypt,
q you shall serve God on this mountain.”
13[†]Then Moses said to God, “If I come to the people of Israel and say
to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they ask me,
‘What is his name?’ what shall I say to them?” 14[†]God said to Moses, “I
AM WHO I AM.” [1] And he said, “Say this to the people of Israel, r ‘I AM has
sent me to you.’” 15[†]God also said to Moses, “Say this to the people of
Israel, ‘The LORD, [2] the s God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is t my name
forever, and thus I am to be remembered throughout all generations.
16[†]Go and u gather the elders of Israel together and say to them, ‘The
LORD, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob,
has appeared to me, saying, v “I have observed you and what has been done
to you in Egypt, 17and I promise that w I will bring you up out of the
affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites,
the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, a land w flowing with milk and
honey.”’ 18[†]And x they will listen to your voice, and you and the elders of
Israel y shall go to the king of Egypt and say to him, ‘The LORD, the God of
the Hebrews, has z met with us; and now, please let us go a three days’
journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.’
19[†]But I know that the king of Egypt a will not let you go unless
compelled b by a mighty hand. [3] 20So c I will stretch out my hand and
strike Egypt with d all the wonders that I will do in it; e after that he will let
you go. 21And f I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians;
and when you go, you shall not go empty,
22but each woman shall ask of
her neighbor, and any woman who lives in her house, for g silver and gold
jewelry, and for clothing. You shall put them on your sons and on your
daughters. So h you shall plunder the Egyptians.”
Moses Given Powerful Signs
EXODUS 4 Then Moses answered, “But behold, they will not believe me or
listen to my voice, for they will say, ‘The LORD did not appear to you.’”
2The LORD said to him, “What is that in your hand?” He said, i “A staff.”
3And he said, “Throw it on the ground.” So he threw it on the ground, and it
became a serpent, and Moses ran from it. 4But the LORD said to Moses, “Put
out your hand and catch it by the tail”—so he put out his hand and caught it,
and it became a staff in his hand— 5“that they may j believe that the LORD,
k the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob, has appeared to you.” 6Again, the LORD said to him, “Put
your hand inside your cloak.” [1] And he put his hand inside his cloak, and
when he took it out, behold, his hand was l leprous [2] like snow.
7Then God
said, “Put your hand back inside your cloak.” So he put his hand back
inside his cloak, and when he took it out, behold, m it was restored like the
rest of his flesh. 8“If they will not believe you,” God said, “or listen to the
first sign, they may believe the latter sign. 9If they will not believe even
these two signs or listen to your voice, you shall take some water from the
Nile and pour it on the dry ground, and the water that you shall take from
the Nile n will become blood on the dry ground.”
10[†]But Moses said to the LORD, “Oh, my Lord, I am not eloquent, either
in the past or since you have spoken to your servant, but o I am slow of
speech and of tongue.” 11Then the LORD said to him, “Who has made man’s
mouth? Who makes him mute, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Is it not I, the
LORD? 12Now therefore go, and p I will be with your mouth and teach you
what you shall speak.” 13But he said, “Oh, my Lord, please send someone
else.” 14[†]Then the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses and he
said, “Is there not Aaron, your brother, the Levite? I know that he can speak
well. Behold, q he is coming out to meet you, and when he sees you, he will
be glad in his heart. 15
r You shall speak to him and s put the words in his
mouth, and p I will be with your mouth and with his mouth and will teach
you both what to do. 16[†] t He shall speak for you to the people, and he
shall be your mouth, and u you shall be as God to him. 17And take in your
hand v this staff, with which you shall do the signs.”
Moses Returns to Egypt
18[†]Moses went back to w Jethro his father-in-law and said to him, “Please
let me go back to my brothers in Egypt to see whether they are still alive.”
And Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.” 19And the LORD said to Moses in
Midian, “Go back to Egypt, for x all the men who were seeking your life are
dead.” 20So Moses took y his wife and his sons and had them ride on a
donkey, and went back to the land of Egypt. And Moses took z the staff of
God in his hand.
21[†]And the LORD said to Moses, “When you go back to Egypt, see that
you do before Pharaoh all the a miracles that I have put in your power. But
b I will harden his heart, so that he will not let the people go. 22[†]Then you
shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the LORD, c Israel is my d firstborn son,
23and I say to you, “Let my son go that he may serve me.” If you refuse to
let him go, behold, I e will kill your firstborn son.’”
24[†]At a lodging place on the way f the LORD met him and g sought to
put him to death. 25Then h Zipporah took a i flint and cut off her son’s
foreskin and touched Moses’ [3] feet with it and said, “Surely you are a
bridegroom of blood to me!” 26So he let him alone. It was then that she
said, “A bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision.
27[†]The LORD said to Aaron, “Go into the wilderness j to meet Moses.”
So he went and met him at the k mountain of God and kissed him. 28And
Moses l told Aaron all the words of the LORD with which he had sent him to
speak, and all m the signs that he had commanded him to do. 29Then Moses
and Aaron n went and gathered together all the elders of the people of
Israel. 30 o Aaron spoke all the words that the LORD had spoken to Moses
and did the signs in the sight of the people. 31And the people p believed;
and when they heard that the LORD had q visited the people of Israel and
that he had r seen their affliction, s they bowed their heads and worshiped.
Making Bricks Without Straw