EXODUS 30 [†] j “You shall make k an altar on which to burn incense; you
shall make it of acacia wood. 2A cubit [1] shall be its length, and a cubit its
breadth. It shall be square, and two cubits shall be its height. l Its horns shall
be of one piece with it. 3You shall m overlay it with pure gold, its top and
around its sides and its horns. And you shall make a molding of gold around
it. 4And you shall make two golden rings for it. Under its molding on two
opposite sides of it you shall make them, and they shall be n holders for
poles with which to carry it. 5You shall make the poles of acacia wood and
overlay them with gold. 6[†]And you shall put it in front of the veil that is
above the ark of the testimony, in front of the o mercy seat that is above the
testimony, where I will meet with you. 7And Aaron shall p burn fragrant
incense on it. Every morning when he q dresses the lamps he shall burn it,
8and when Aaron sets up the lamps at twilight, he shall burn it, a regular
incense offering before the LORD throughout your generations. 9[†]You
shall not offer r unauthorized incense on it, or a burnt offering, or a grain
offering, and you shall not pour a drink offering on it. 10 s Aaron shall make
atonement on its horns once a year. With the blood of the t sin offering of
atonement he shall make atonement for it once in the year throughout your
generations. It is most holy to the LORD.”
The Census Tax
11[†]The LORD said to Moses, 12[†] u “When you take the census of the
people of Israel, then each shall give v a ransom for his life to the LORD
when you number them, that there be no plague among them when you
number them. 13Each one who is numbered in the census shall give this:
half a shekel [2] according to the w shekel of the sanctuary (the x shekel is
twenty gerahs), [3] y half a shekel as an offering to the LORD.
14Everyone
who is numbered in the census, from twenty years old and upward, shall
give the LORD’s offering. 15The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall
not give less, than y the half shekel, when you give the LORD’s offering to
make atonement for your lives. 16You shall take the atonement money from
the people of Israel and shall z give it for the service of the tent of meeting,
that it may bring the people of Israel to a remembrance before the LORD, so
as to make atonement for your lives.”
The Bronze Basin
17[†]The LORD said to Moses, 18“You shall also make a b basin of bronze,
with its stand of bronze, for washing. b You shall put it between the tent of
meeting and the altar, and you shall put water in it, 19with which Aaron and
his sons c shall wash their hands and their feet. 20[†]When they go into the
tent of meeting, or when they come near the altar to minister, to burn a food
offering [4] to the LORD, they shall wash with water, so that they may not
die. 21They shall wash their hands and their feet, so that they may not die. It
shall d be a statute forever to them, even to him and to his offspring
throughout their generations.”
The Anointing Oil and Incense
22[†]The LORD said to Moses, 23“Take the e finest spices: of liquid myrrh
500 shekels, and of sweet-smelling cinnamon half as much, that is, 250, and
250 of f aromatic cane, 24and 500 of cassia, according to the shekel of the
sanctuary, and a g hin [5] of olive oil. 25And you shall make of these a sacred
anointing oil blended as by the h perfumer; it shall be a i holy anointing oil.
26 j With it you shall anoint the tent of meeting and the ark of the testimony,
27and the table and all its utensils, and the lampstand and its utensils, and
the altar of incense, 28and the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils and
the k basin and its stand. 29You shall consecrate them, that they may be most
holy. l Whatever touches them will become holy.
30
m You shall anoint
Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may serve me as priests.
31And you shall say to the people of Israel, ‘This shall be my holy anointing
oil throughout your generations. 32It shall not be poured on the body of an
ordinary person, and you shall make no other like it in composition. n It is
holy, and it shall be holy to you. 33[†] o Whoever compounds any like it or
whoever puts any of it on an outsider shall be cut off from his people.’”
34The LORD said to Moses, p “Take sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and
galbanum, sweet spices with pure frankincense (of each shall there be an
equal part), 35and make an q incense blended as by the r perfumer,
s seasoned with salt, pure and holy.
36You shall beat some of it very small,
and put part of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting t where I shall
meet with you. u It shall be most holy for you. 37And the incense that you
shall make v according to its composition, you shall not make for
yourselves. It shall be for you holy to the LORD.
38 w Whoever makes any
like it to use as perfume shall be cut off from his people.”
Oholiab and Bezalel
EXODUS 31 The LORD said to Moses, 2“See, I have called by name x Bezalel
the son of Uri, son of y Hur, of the tribe of Judah, 3[†]and I have z filled him
with the Spirit of God, with ability and intelligence, with knowledge and all
craftsmanship, 4to devise artistic designs, to work in gold, silver, and
bronze, 5in cutting stones for setting, and in carving wood, to work in every
craft. 6And behold, I have appointed with him a Oholiab, the son of
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. And I have given to all able men b ability,
that they may make all that I have commanded you: 7 c the tent of meeting,
and d the ark of the testimony, and e the mercy seat that is on it, and all the
furnishings of the tent, 8 f the table and its utensils, and g the pure lampstand
with all its utensils, and h the altar of incense, 9and i the altar of burnt
offering with all its utensils, and j the basin and its stand, 10and k the finely
worked garments, [1] the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the
garments of his sons, for their service as priests, 11and l the anointing oil
and the fragrant m incense for the Holy Place. According to all that I have
commanded you, they shall do.”
The Sabbath
12[†]And the LORD said to Moses, 13“You are to speak to the people of
Israel and say, ‘Above all you shall keep my Sabbaths, for this is a sign
between me and you throughout your generations, that you may know that
I, the LORD, sanctify you. 14[†]You shall keep the Sabbath, because it is
holy for you. Everyone who profanes it shall be put to death. n Whoever
does any work on it, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
15 o Six days shall work be done, but p the seventh day is a Sabbath of
solemn rest, holy to the LORD. n Whoever does any work on the Sabbath
day shall be put to death. 16Therefore the people of Israel shall keep the
Sabbath, observing the Sabbath throughout their generations, as a covenant
forever.
17 q It is a sign forever between me and the people of Israel that r in
six days the LORD made heaven and earth, and s on the seventh day he
rested and was refreshed.’”
18[†]And he gave to Moses, when he had finished speaking with him on
Mount Sinai, the t two tablets of the testimony, tablets of stone, written with
u the finger of God.
The Golden Calf