EXODUS 19 [†]On the third new moon after the people of Israel had gone
out of the land of Egypt, on that day they p came into the wilderness of
Sinai. 2They set out from q Rephidim and came into the wilderness of Sinai,
and they encamped in the wilderness. There Israel encamped before r the
mountain, 3while s Moses went up to God. t The LORD called to him out of
the mountain, saying, “Thus you shall say to the house of Jacob, and tell the
people of Israel: 4[†] u You yourselves have seen what I did to the
Egyptians, and how v I bore you on eagles’ wings and brought you to
myself. 5Now therefore, if you will indeed obey my voice and keep my
covenant, you shall be w my treasured possession among all peoples, for
x all the earth is mine; 6[†]and you shall be to me a y kingdom of priests and
z a holy nation. These are the words that you shall speak to the people of
Israel.”
7So Moses came and called the elders of the people and set before them
all these words that the LORD had commanded him. 8 a All the people
answered together and said, “All that the LORD has spoken we will do.” And
Moses reported the words of the people to the LORD.
9And the LORD said to
Moses, “Behold, I am coming to you b in a thick cloud, that c the people
may hear when I speak with you, and may also d believe you forever.”
When Moses told the words of the people to the LORD,
10[†]the LORD
said to Moses, “Go to the people and e consecrate them today and
tomorrow, and let them f wash their garments 11and be ready for the third
day. For on the third day g the LORD will come down on Mount Sinai in the
sight of all the people. 12And you shall set limits for the people all around,
saying, ‘Take care not to go up into the mountain or touch the edge of it.
h Whoever touches the mountain shall be put to death. 13No hand shall
touch him, but he shall be stoned or shot; [1] whether beast or man, he shall
not live.’ When i the trumpet sounds a long blast, they shall come up to the
mountain.” 14So Moses j went down from the mountain to the people and
e consecrated the people; f and they washed their garments. 15[†]And he
said to the people, “Be ready for the k third day; l do not go near a woman.”
16[†]On the morning of the k third day there were m thunders and
lightnings and n a thick cloud on the mountain and a very loud o trumpet
blast, so that all the people in the camp p trembled. 17Then q Moses brought
the people out of the camp to meet God, and they took their stand at the foot
of the mountain. 18Now r Mount Sinai was wrapped in smoke because the
LORD had descended on it in fire. The smoke of it went up like the smoke of
a kiln, and s the whole mountain trembled greatly.
19And as the o sound of
the trumpet grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and t God answered him
in thunder.
20The LORD came down on Mount Sinai, to the top of the
mountain. And the LORD called Moses to the top of the mountain, and
Moses went up.
21And the LORD said to Moses, “Go down and warn the people, lest they
break through to the LORD u to look and many of them perish. 22[†]Also let
the priests who come near to the LORD v consecrate themselves, lest the
LORD w break out against them.” 23And Moses said to the LORD, “The
people cannot come up to Mount Sinai, for you yourself warned us, saying,
x ‘Set limits around the mountain and consecrate it.’” 24And the LORD said
to him, “Go down, and come up bringing Aaron with you. But do not let the
priests and the people y break through to come up to the LORD, lest he break
out against them.” 25So Moses went down to the people and told them.
The Ten Commandments