EXODUS 21 [†]“Now these are the h rules that you shall set before them.
2[†] i When you buy a Hebrew slave, [1] he shall serve six years, and in the
seventh he shall go out free, for nothing. 3If he comes in single, he shall go
out single; if he comes in married, then his wife shall go out with him. 4If
his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife
and her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out alone. 5[†]But j if
the slave plainly says, ‘I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will
not go out free,’ 6then his master shall bring him to k God, and he shall
bring him to the door or the doorpost. And his master shall bore his ear
through with an awl, and he shall be his slave forever.
7[†]“When a man l sells his daughter as a slave, she shall not go out as
the male slaves do. 8If she does not please her master, who has designated
her [2] for himself, then he shall let her be redeemed. He shall have no right
to sell her to a foreign people, since he has broken faith with her.
9If he
designates her for his son, he shall deal with her as with a daughter.
10If he
takes another wife to himself, he shall not diminish her food, her clothing,
or m her marital rights. 11And if he does not do these three things for her,
she shall go out for nothing, without payment of money.
12 n “Whoever strikes a man so that he dies shall be put to death.
13[†] o But if he did not lie in wait for him, but God let him fall into his
hand, then p I will appoint for you a place to which he may flee. 14But if a
man willfully attacks another to kill him by cunning, q you shall take him
from my altar, that he may die.
15“Whoever strikes his father or his mother shall be put to death.
16
r “Whoever steals a man and sells him, and anyone found s in
possession of him, shall be put to death.
17[†] t “Whoever curses [3] his father or his mother shall be put to death.
18“When men quarrel and one strikes the other with a stone or with his
fist and the man does not die but takes to his bed, 19then if the man rises
again and walks outdoors with his staff, he who struck him shall be clear;
only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall have him thoroughly
healed.
20[†]“When a man strikes his slave, male or female, with a rod and the
slave dies under his hand, he shall be avenged. 21But if the slave survives a
day or two, he is not to be avenged, for the u slave is his money.
22[†]“When men strive together and hit a pregnant woman, so that her
children come out, but there is no harm, the one who hit her shall surely be
fined, as the woman’s husband shall impose on him, and v he shall pay as
the w judges determine. 23[†]But if there is harm, [4] then you shall pay x life
for life, 24 y eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, 25burn
for burn, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
26“When a man strikes the eye of his slave, male or female, and destroys
it, he shall let the slave go free because of his eye. 27If he knocks out the
tooth of his slave, male or female, he shall let the slave go free because of
his tooth.
28[†]“When an ox gores a man or a woman to death, the z ox shall be
stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the ox shall not be
liable. 29But if the ox has been accustomed to gore in the past, and its owner
has been warned but has not kept it in, and it kills a man or a woman, the ox
shall be stoned, and its owner also shall be put to death. 30If a a ransom is
imposed on him, then v he shall give for the redemption of his life whatever
is imposed on him. 31If it gores a man’s son or daughter, he shall be dealt
with according to this same rule. 32If the ox gores a slave, male or female,
the owner shall give to their master b thirty shekels [5] of silver, and z the ox
shall be stoned.
Laws About Restitution
33[†]“When a man opens a pit, or when a man digs a pit and does not cover
it, and an ox or a donkey falls into it, 34the owner of the pit shall make
restoration. He shall give money to its owner, and the dead beast shall be
his.
35“When one man’s ox butts another’s, so that it dies, then they shall sell
the live ox and share its price, and the dead beast also they shall share. 36Or
if it is known that the ox has been accustomed to gore in the past, and its
owner has not kept it in, he shall repay ox for ox, and the dead beast shall
be his.
EXODUS 22 [1] “If a man steals an ox or a sheep, and kills it or sells it, he
shall repay five oxen for an ox, and c four sheep for a sheep. 2[†] [2] If a
thief is found d breaking in and is struck so that he dies, there shall be no
bloodguilt for him, 3but if the sun has risen on him, there shall be bloodguilt
for him. He shall surely pay. If he has nothing, then e he shall be sold for his
theft. 4If the stolen beast f is found alive in his possession, whether it is an
ox or a donkey or a sheep, g he shall pay double.
5“If a man causes a field or vineyard to be grazed over, or lets his beast
loose and it feeds in another man’s field, he shall make restitution from the
best in his own field and in his own vineyard.
6“If fire breaks out and catches in thorns so that the stacked grain or the
standing grain or the field is consumed, he who started the fire shall make
full restitution.
7“If a man gives to his neighbor money or goods to keep safe, and it is
stolen from the man’s house, then, if the thief is found, g he shall pay
double. 8If the thief is not found, the owner of the house shall come near to
God to show whether or not he has put his hand to his neighbor’s property.
9[†]For every breach of trust, whether it is for an ox, for a donkey, for a
sheep, for a cloak, or for any kind of lost thing, of which one says, ‘This is
it,’ the case of both parties shall come before God. The one whom God
condemns shall pay double to his neighbor.
10“If a man gives to his neighbor a donkey or an ox or a sheep or any
beast to keep safe, and it dies or is injured or is driven away, without
anyone seeing it, 11
h an oath by the LORD shall be between them both to see
whether or not he has put his hand to his neighbor’s property. The owner
shall accept the oath, and he shall not make restitution. 12But if i it is stolen
from him, he shall make restitution to its owner.
13If it is torn by beasts, let
him bring it as evidence. He shall not make restitution for what has been
torn.
14“If a man borrows anything of his neighbor, and it is injured or dies, the
owner not being with it, he shall make full restitution. 15If the owner was
with it, he shall not make restitution; if it was hired, it came for its hiring
fee. [3]
Laws About Social Justice
16[†] j “If a man seduces a virgin [4] who is not betrothed and lies with her,
he shall give the bride-price [5] for her and make her his wife. 17If her father
utterly refuses to give her to him, j he shall pay money equal to the k bride-
price for virgins.
18 l “You shall not permit a sorceress to live.
19
m “Whoever lies with an animal shall be put to death.
20 n “Whoever sacrifices to any god, other than the LORD alone, shall be
devoted to destruction. [6]
21
o “You shall not wrong a sojourner or oppress him, for you were
sojourners in the land of Egypt. 22[†] p You shall not mistreat any widow or
fatherless child. 23If you do mistreat them, and they q cry out to me, I will
surely r hear their cry,
24and my wrath will burn, and I will kill you with the
sword, and s your wives shall become widows and your children fatherless.
25 t “If you lend money to any of my people with you who is poor, you
shall not be like a moneylender to him, and you shall not exact interest from
him. 26
u If ever you take your neighbor’s cloak in pledge, you shall return it
to him before the sun goes down, 27for that is his only covering, and it is his
cloak for his body; in what else shall he sleep? And if he q cries to me, I
will hear, for I am v compassionate.
28 w “You shall not revile God, nor w curse a ruler of your people.
29“You shall not delay to offer from the fullness of your harvest and from
the outflow of your presses. x The firstborn of your sons you shall give to
me. 30 y You shall do the same with your oxen and with your sheep: z seven
days it shall be with its mother; on the eighth day you shall give it to me.
31
a “You shall be consecrated to me. Therefore b you shall not eat any
flesh that is torn by beasts in the field; c you shall throw it to the dogs.
EXODUS 23 d “You shall not spread a false report. You shall not join
hands with a wicked man to be a e malicious witness. 2You shall not fall in
with the many to do evil, nor shall you bear witness in a lawsuit, siding with
the many, so as to pervert justice, 3
f nor shall you be partial to a poor man in
his lawsuit.
4[†] g “If you meet your enemy’s ox or his donkey going astray, you shall
bring it back to him. 5If you see the donkey of one who hates you lying
down under its burden, you shall refrain from leaving him with it; you shall
rescue it with him.
6[†] h “You shall not pervert the justice due to your poor in his lawsuit.
7
d Keep far from a false charge, and i do not kill the innocent and righteous,
for j I will not acquit the wicked. 8 k And you shall take no bribe, for a bribe
blinds the clear-sighted and subverts the cause of those who are in the right.
9 l “You shall not oppress a sojourner. You know the heart of a sojourner,
for you were sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Laws About the Sabbath and Festivals
10[†] m “For six years you shall sow your land and gather in its yield, 11but
the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie fallow, that the poor of your
people may eat; and what they leave the beasts of the field may eat. You
shall do likewise with your vineyard, and with your olive orchard.
12 n “Six days you shall do your work, but on the seventh day you shall
rest; that your ox and your donkey may have rest, and the son of your
servant woman, and the alien, may be refreshed.
13
o “Pay attention to all that I have said to you, and make no mention of
the names of other gods, nor let it be heard on your lips.
14[†] p “Three times in the year you shall keep a feast to me. 15 q You shall
keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread. As I commanded you, you shall eat
unleavened bread for seven days at the appointed time in the month of
r Abib, for in it you came out of Egypt. s None shall appear before me
empty-handed. 16You shall keep t the Feast of Harvest, of the firstfruits of
your labor, of what you sow in the field. You shall keep the u Feast of
Ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather in from the field the
fruit of your labor.
17 p Three times in the year shall all your males appear
before the Lord GOD.
18
v “You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with anything leavened,
or let the fat of my feast remain until the morning.
19[†]“The best of the w firstfruits of your ground you shall bring into the
house of the LORD your God.
x “You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
Conquest of Canaan Promised
20[†] y “Behold, I send an angel before you to guard you on the way and to
bring you to the place that I have prepared. 21Pay careful attention to him
and obey his voice; z do not rebel against him, a for he will not pardon your
transgression, for my name is in him.
22“But if you carefully obey his voice and do all that I say, then b I will
be an enemy to your enemies and an adversary to your adversaries.
23
y “When my angel goes before you and brings you c to the Amorites
and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the Canaanites, the Hivites and the
Jebusites, and I blot them out, 24[†]you shall d not bow down to their gods
nor serve them, e nor do as they do, but f you shall utterly overthrow them
and break their g pillars in pieces. 25You h shall serve the LORD your God,
and i he [1] will bless your bread and your water, and j I will take sickness
away from among you. 26 k None shall miscarry or be barren in your land; I
will fulfill the l number of your days. 27I will send m my terror before you
and will throw into n confusion all the people against whom you shall come,
and I will make all your enemies turn their backs to you. 28And o I will send
hornets [2] before you, which shall drive out the Hivites, the Canaanites, and
the Hittites from before you. 29 p I will not drive them out from before you
in one year, lest the land become desolate and the wild beasts multiply
against you. 30Little by little I will drive them out from before you, until
you have increased and possess the land. 31
q And I will set your border
from the Red Sea to the Sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness to
the Euphrates, [3] for r I will give the inhabitants of the land into your hand,
and you shall drive them out before you. 32
s You shall make no covenant
with them and their gods. 33They shall not dwell in your land, lest they
make you sin against me; for if you serve their gods, t it will surely be a
snare to you.”
The Covenant Confirmed