EXODUS 6 [†]But the LORD said to Moses, “Now you shall see what I will
do to Pharaoh; for with a strong hand he will send them out, and with e a
strong hand he will f drive them out of his land.”
2God spoke to Moses and said to him, g “I am the LORD.
3[†]I appeared
to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, as h God Almighty, [1] but by my name
the i LORD I did not make myself known to them. 4 j I also established my
covenant with them k to give them the land of Canaan, the land in which
they lived as sojourners. 5Moreover, l I have heard the groaning of the
people of Israel whom the Egyptians hold as slaves, and I have remembered
my covenant. 6[†]Say therefore to the people of Israel, m ‘I am the LORD,
and n I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I
will deliver you from slavery to them, and o I will redeem you with an
outstretched arm and with great acts of judgment. 7[†]I p will take you to be
my people, and q I will be your God, and you shall know that m I am the
LORD your God, who has brought you out n from under the burdens of the
Egyptians. 8I will bring you into r the land that I s swore to give to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. I will give it to you for a possession. m I
am the LORD.’” 9Moses spoke thus to the people of Israel, but they t did not
listen to Moses, because of their broken spirit and harsh slavery.
10So the LORD said to Moses, 11“Go in, tell Pharaoh king of Egypt to let
the people of Israel go out of his land.” 12[†]But Moses said to the LORD,
“Behold, the people of Israel have t not listened to me. How then shall
Pharaoh listen to me, for u I am of uncircumcised lips?” 13But the LORD
spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them a charge about the people of
Israel and about Pharaoh king of Egypt: to bring the people of Israel out of
the land of Egypt.
The Genealogy of Moses and Aaron
14[†]These are the heads of their fathers’ houses: the v sons of Reuben, the
firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi; these are the clans of
Reuben. 15The w sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and
Shaul, the son of a Canaanite woman; these are the clans of Simeon.
16These are the names of the x sons of Levi according to their generations:
Gershon, Kohath, and Merari, the years of the life of Levi being 137 years.
17The y sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, by their clans. 18The z sons of
Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, the years of the life of Kohath
being 133 years. 19The a sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the
clans of the Levites according to their generations. 20
b Amram took as his
wife Jochebed his father’s sister, and she bore him Aaron and Moses, the
years of the life of Amram being 137 years. 21 c The sons of Izhar: Korah,
Nepheg, and Zichri. 22The d sons of Uzziel: Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri.
23Aaron took as his wife Elisheba, the daughter of e Amminadab and the
sister of f Nahshon, and she bore him g Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
24The h sons of Korah: Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph; these are the clans of
the Korahites. 25Eleazar, Aaron’s son, took as his wife one of the daughters
of Putiel, and i she bore him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers’
houses of the Levites by their clans.
26These are the Aaron and Moses j to whom the LORD said: “Bring out
the people of Israel from the land of Egypt k by their hosts.” 27It was they
who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt about bringing out the people of Israel
from Egypt, this Moses and this Aaron.
28On the day when the LORD spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, 29the
LORD said to Moses, l “I am the LORD; m tell Pharaoh king of Egypt all that
I say to you.” 30But Moses said to the LORD, “Behold, n I am of
uncircumcised lips. How will Pharaoh listen to me?”
Moses and Aaron Before Pharaoh
EXODUS 7 And the LORD said to Moses, “See, I have made you like o God
to Pharaoh, and your brother Aaron shall be your p prophet. 2
q You shall
speak all that I command you, and your brother Aaron shall tell Pharaoh to
let the people of Israel go out of his land. 3But r I will harden Pharaoh’s
heart, and though I s multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt,
4Pharaoh will not listen to you. Then I will lay my hand on Egypt and bring
my hosts, my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great
acts of judgment. 5[†]The Egyptians t shall know that I am the LORD, when
I stretch out my hand against Egypt and bring out the people of Israel from
among them.” 6Moses and Aaron did so; they did just as the LORD
commanded them. 7Now Moses was u eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-
three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh.
8[†]Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, 9[†]“When Pharaoh says to
you, v ‘Prove yourselves by working a miracle,’ then you shall say to Aaron,
‘Take your staff and cast it down before Pharaoh, that it may become a
serpent.’” 10So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did just as the LORD
commanded. Aaron cast down his staff before Pharaoh and his servants, and
it became a serpent. 11[†]Then Pharaoh summoned the wise men and the
sorcerers, and they, the w magicians of Egypt, also x did the same by their
secret arts. 12For each man cast down his staff, and they became serpents.
But Aaron’s staff swallowed up their staffs. 13[†]Still r Pharaoh’s heart was
hardened, and he would not listen to them, r as the LORD had said.
The First Plague: Water Turned to Blood
14[†]Then the LORD said to Moses, “Pharaoh’s heart is hardened; he refuses
to let the people go. 15 y Go to Pharaoh in the morning, as he is going out to
the water. Stand on the bank of the Nile to meet him, and take in your hand
z the staff that turned into a a serpent. 16[†]And you shall say to him, ‘The
b LORD, the God of the Hebrews, sent me to you, saying, “Let my people
go, c that they may serve me in the wilderness.” But so far, you have not
obeyed. 17Thus says the LORD, “By this d you shall know that I am the
LORD: behold, with the staff that is in my hand I will strike the water that is
in the Nile, and e it shall turn into blood. 18The fish in the Nile shall die, and
the Nile will stink, and the Egyptians will f grow weary of drinking water
from the Nile.”’” 19[†]And the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Take
your staff and g stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt, over their
rivers, their canals, and their ponds, and all their pools of water, so that they
may become blood, and there shall be blood throughout all the land of
Egypt, even in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.’”
20Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded. In the sight of Pharaoh
and in the sight of his servants he h lifted up the staff and struck the water in
the Nile, and all the i water in the Nile turned into blood. 21And the fish in
the Nile died, and the Nile stank, so that the Egyptians j could not drink
water from the Nile. There was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.
22But k the magicians of Egypt did the same by their secret arts. So
l Pharaoh’s heart remained hardened, and he would not listen to them, as
m the LORD had said. 23Pharaoh turned and went into his house, and he did
not take even this to heart. 24[†]And all the Egyptians dug along the Nile for
water to drink, for they could not drink the water of the Nile.
25Seven full days passed after the LORD had struck the Nile.
The Second Plague: Frogs
EXODUS 8 [1] Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh and say to
him, ‘Thus says the LORD, “Let my people go, that n they may serve me.
2But if you o refuse to let them go, behold, I will plague all your country
with p frogs. 3[†]The Nile shall swarm with frogs that shall come up into
your house and into q your bedroom and on your bed and into the houses of
your servants and your people, [2] and into your ovens and your kneading
bowls. 4The frogs shall come up on you and on your people and on all your
servants.”’” 5 [3] And the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, r ‘Stretch out
your hand with your staff over the rivers, over the canals and over the pools,
and make frogs come up on the land of Egypt!’” 6So Aaron stretched out his
hand over the waters of Egypt, and s the frogs came up and covered the land
of Egypt. 7[†]But t the magicians did the same by their secret arts and made
frogs come up on the land of Egypt.
8[†]Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron and said, u “Plead with the
LORD to take away the frogs from me and from my people, and v I will let
the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.” 9Moses said to Pharaoh, “Be
pleased to command me when u I am to plead for you and for your servants
and for your people, that the frogs be cut off from you and your houses and
be left only in the Nile.” 10And he said, “Tomorrow.” Moses said, “Be it as
you say, so w that you may know that x there is no one like the LORD our
God. 11The frogs shall go away from you and your houses and your
servants and your people. They shall be left only in the Nile.” 12So Moses
and Aaron went out from Pharaoh, and Moses cried to the LORD about the
frogs, as he had agreed with Pharaoh. [4] 13And the LORD did according to
the word of Moses. The frogs died out in the houses, the courtyards, and the
fields. 14[†]And they gathered them together in heaps, and the land stank.
15[†]But when Pharaoh saw that there was a y respite, he z hardened his
heart and would not listen to them, as the LORD had said.
The Third Plague: Gnats
16Then the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, a ‘Stretch out your staff and
strike the dust of the earth, so that it may become gnats in all the land of
Egypt.’” 17And they did so. Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff and
struck the dust of the earth, and b there were gnats on man and beast. All the
dust of the earth became gnats in all the land of Egypt. 18[†]The c magicians
tried by their secret arts to produce gnats, but they could not. So there were
gnats on man and beast. 19Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, “This is
d the finger of God.” But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not
listen to them, as the LORD had said.
The Fourth Plague: Flies
20[†]Then the LORD said to Moses, e “Rise up early in the morning and
present yourself to Pharaoh, as he goes out to the water, and say to him,
‘Thus says the LORD, f “Let my people go, that they may serve me. 21Or
else, if you will not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies on
you and your servants and your people, and into your houses. And the
houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with swarms of flies, and also the
ground on which they stand. 22[†]But on that day g I will set apart the land
of Goshen, where my people dwell, so that no swarms of flies shall be
there, h that you may know that I am the LORD in the midst of the earth. [5]
23Thus I will put a division [6] between my people and your people.
Tomorrow this sign shall happen.”’” 24And the LORD did so. i There came
great swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh and into his servants’
houses. Throughout all the land of Egypt the land was ruined by the swarms
of flies.
25Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron and said, “Go, sacrifice to your
God within the land.” 26But Moses said, “It would not be right to do so, for
the offerings we shall sacrifice to the LORD our God are an j abomination to
the Egyptians. If we sacrifice offerings j abominable to the Egyptians before
their eyes, will they not stone us? 27We must go k three days’ journey into
the wilderness and sacrifice to the LORD our God l as he tells us.” 28[†]So
Pharaoh said, “I will let you go to sacrifice to the LORD your God in the
wilderness; only you must not go very far away. m Plead for me.” 29Then
Moses said, “Behold, I am going out from you and I will plead with the
LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants,
and from his people, tomorrow. Only let not Pharaoh n cheat again by not
letting the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.” 30So Moses went out from
Pharaoh and prayed to the LORD.
31And the LORD did as Moses asked, and
removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his
people; not one remained. 32But Pharaoh o hardened his heart this time also,
and did not let the people go.
The Fifth Plague: Egyptian Livestock Die