EXODUS 2 [†]Now a t man from the house of Levi went and took as his wife
a Levite woman. 2[†]The woman conceived and bore a son, and u when she
saw that he was a fine child, she hid him three months. 3When she could
hide him no longer, she took for him a basket made of bulrushes [1] and
daubed it with bitumen and pitch. She put the child in it and placed it
among the v reeds by the river bank. 4And w his sister stood at a distance to
know what would be done to him. 5Now the daughter of Pharaoh came
down to bathe at the river, while her young women walked beside the river.
She saw the basket among the reeds and sent her servant woman, and she
took it. 6When she opened it, she saw the child, and behold, the baby was
crying. She took pity on him and said, “This is one of the Hebrews’
children.” 7[†]Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and
call you a nurse from the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?” 8And
Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go.” So the girl went and called the child’s
mother.
9And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child away and
nurse him for me, and I will give you your wages.” So the woman took the
child and nursed him. 10[†]When the child grew older, she brought him to
Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became x her son. She named him Moses,
“Because,” she said, “I y drew him out of the water.” [2]
Moses Flees to Midian
11[†]One day, z when Moses had grown up, he went out to his people and
looked on their a burdens, and he saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of
his people. [3] 12He looked this way and that, and seeing no one, he b struck
down the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. 13When c he went out the next
day, behold, two Hebrews were struggling together. And he said to the man
in the wrong, “Why do you strike your companion?” 14[†]He answered,
d “Who made you a prince and a judge over us? Do you mean to kill me as
you killed the Egyptian?” Then Moses was afraid, and thought, “Surely the
thing is known.” 15[†]When Pharaoh heard of it, he sought to kill Moses.
But e Moses fled from Pharaoh and stayed in the land of Midian. And he sat
down by f a well.
16Now the g priest of Midian had seven daughters, and h they came and
drew water and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock. 17The
shepherds came and drove them away, but Moses stood up and saved them,
and i watered their flock. 18[†]When they came home to their father j Reuel,
he said, “How is it that you have come home so soon today?” 19[†]They
said, “An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds and even
drew water for us and i watered the flock.” 20He said to his daughters,
“Then where is he? Why have you left the man? Call him, that he may k eat
bread.” 21And Moses was content to dwell with the man, and he gave
Moses his daughter l Zipporah. 22She gave birth to a son, and he called his
name m Gershom, for he said, “I have been a n sojourner [4] in a foreign
land.”
God Hears Israel’s Groaning
23[†] o During those many days the king of Egypt died, and the people of
Israel p groaned because of their slavery and cried out for help. q Their cry
for rescue from slavery came up to God. 24[†]And r God heard their
groaning, and God s remembered his covenant with t Abraham, with Isaac,
and with Jacob. 25God u saw the people of Israel—and God v knew.
The Burning Bush