EXODUS 32 [†]When the people saw that Moses v delayed to come down
from the mountain, the people gathered themselves together to Aaron and
said to him, w “Up, make us gods who shall x go before us. As for this
Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not
know what has become of him.” 2So Aaron said to them, “Take off the
y rings of gold that are in the ears of your wives, your sons, and your
daughters, and bring them to me.” 3So all the people took off the rings of
gold that were in their ears and brought them to Aaron. 4[†] z And he
received the gold from their hand and fashioned it with a graving tool and
made a golden [1] calf. And they said, a “These are your gods, O Israel, who
brought you up out of the land of Egypt!” 5When Aaron saw this, he built
an altar before it. And Aaron b made a proclamation and said, “Tomorrow
shall be a feast to the LORD.” 6[†]And they rose up early the next day and
offered burnt offerings and brought peace offerings. And c the people sat
down to eat and drink and rose up d to play.
7And the LORD said to Moses, e “Go down, for your people, whom you
brought up out of the land of Egypt, have f corrupted themselves. 8They
have turned aside quickly out of the way that g I commanded them. They
have made for themselves a golden calf and have worshiped it and
sacrificed to it and said, ‘These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up
out of the land of Egypt!’” 9And the LORD said to Moses, “I have seen this
people, and behold, h it is a stiff-necked people. 10Now therefore i let me
alone, that j my wrath may burn hot against them and k I may consume
them, in order that l I may make a great nation of you.”
11[†]But m Moses implored the LORD his God and said, “O LORD, why
does your wrath burn hot against your people, whom you have brought out
of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand? 12
n Why
should the Egyptians say, ‘With evil intent did he bring them out, to kill
them in the mountains and to consume them from the face of the earth’?
Turn from your burning anger and o relent from this disaster against your
people. 13Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, your servants, to whom
you p swore by your own self, and said to them, q ‘I will multiply your
offspring as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have promised I will
give to your offspring, and they shall inherit it forever.’” 14And the LORD
r relented from the disaster that he had spoken of bringing on his people.
15Then s Moses turned and went down from the mountain with the t two
tablets of the testimony in his hand, tablets that were written on both sides;
on the front and on the back they were written. 16[†] u The tablets were the
work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, engraved on the
tablets. 17When v Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he
said to Moses, “There is a noise of war in the camp.” 18But he said, “It is
not the sound of w shouting for victory, or the sound of the cry of defeat, but
the sound of singing that I hear.” 19[†]And as soon as he came near the
camp and x saw the calf and the dancing, Moses’ anger burned hot, and he
threw the tablets out of his hands and broke them at the foot of the
mountain. 20[†]He took the calf that they had made and burned it with fire
and ground it to powder and scattered it on the water and made the people
of Israel drink it.
21And Moses said to Aaron, y “What did this people do to you that you
have brought such a great sin upon them?” 22And Aaron said, “Let not the
anger of my lord burn hot. z You know the people, that they are set on evil.
23For a they said to me, ‘Make us gods who shall go before us. As for this
Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not
know what has become of him.’ 24[†]So b I said to them, ‘Let any who have
gold take it off.’ So they gave it to me, and I threw it into the fire, and out
came this calf.”
25And when Moses saw that the people had broken loose (for Aaron had
let them break loose, c to the derision of their enemies), 26then Moses stood
in the gate of the camp and said, “Who is on the LORD’s side? Come to me.”
And all the sons of Levi gathered around him. 27[†]And he said to them,
“Thus says the LORD God of Israel, ‘Put your sword on your side each of
you, and go to and fro from gate to gate throughout the camp, and each of
you d kill his brother and his companion and his neighbor.’” 28And the sons
of Levi did according to the word of Moses. And that day about three
thousand men of the people fell. 29And Moses said, “Today you have been
e ordained for the service of the LORD, each one at the cost of his son and of
his brother, so that he might bestow a blessing upon you this day.”
30The next day Moses said to the people, f “You have sinned a great sin.
And now I will go up to the LORD; g perhaps I can make atonement for your
sin.” 31So Moses returned to the LORD and said, “Alas, f this people has
sinned a great sin. They have h made for themselves gods of gold. 32But
now, if i you will forgive their sin—but if not, please j blot me out of k your
book that you have written.” 33[†]But the LORD said to Moses, l “Whoever
has sinned against me, I will blot out of my book. 34
m But now go, lead the
people to the place about which I have spoken to you; n behold, my angel
shall go before you. Nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit their
sin upon them.”
35Then the LORD sent a plague on the people, because they made the calf,
the one that Aaron made.
The Command to Leave Sinai