EXODUS 35 [†]Moses assembled all the congregation of the people of Israel
and said to them, b “These are the things that the LORD has commanded you
to do. 2
c Six days work shall be done, but on the seventh day you shall have
a Sabbath of solemn rest, holy to the LORD. Whoever does any work on it
shall be put to death. 3 d You shall kindle no fire in all your dwelling places
on the Sabbath day.”
Contributions for the Tabernacle
4Moses said to all the congregation of the people of Israel, “This is the thing
that the LORD has commanded. 5[†] e Take from among you a contribution to
the LORD. f Whoever is of a generous heart, let him bring the LORD’s
contribution: gold, silver, and bronze; 6blue and purple and scarlet yarns
and fine twined linen; goats’ hair,
7tanned rams’ skins, and goatskins; [1]
acacia wood, 8oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the
fragrant incense, 9and onyx stones and stones for setting, for the ephod and
for the breastpiece.
10[†]“Let g every skillful craftsman among you come and make all that
the LORD has commanded: 11 h the tabernacle, its tent and its covering, its
hooks and its frames, its bars, its pillars, and its bases; 12
i the ark with its
poles, the mercy seat, and the j veil of the screen; 13 k the table with its poles
and all its utensils, and the l bread of the Presence; 14 m the lampstand also
for the light, with its utensils and its lamps, and the n oil for the light;
15 o and the altar of incense, with its poles, p and the anointing oil and the
q fragrant incense, and r the screen for the door, at the door of the
tabernacle; 16
s the altar of burnt offering, with its grating of bronze, its
poles, and all its utensils, the t basin and its stand; 17 u the hangings of the
court, its pillars and its bases, and the screen for the gate of the court;
18 v the pegs of the tabernacle and the pegs of the court, and their w cords;
19the x finely worked garments for ministering [2] in the Holy Place, the
holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, for their
service as priests.”
20[†]Then all the congregation of the people of Israel departed from the
presence of Moses. 21And they came, y everyone whose heart stirred him,
and everyone whose spirit moved him, z and brought the LORD’s
contribution to be used for the tent of meeting, and for all its service, and
for the holy garments. 22So they came, both men and women. All who were
of a willing heart brought brooches and earrings and signet rings and
armlets, all sorts of gold objects, every man dedicating an offering of gold
to the LORD.
23And a every one who possessed b blue or purple or scarlet
yarns or fine linen or goats’ hair or tanned rams’ skins or goatskins brought
them. 24
c Everyone who could make a contribution of silver or bronze
brought it as the LORD’s contribution. And every one who possessed acacia
wood of any use in the work brought it. 25And every d skillful woman spun
with her hands, and they all brought what they had spun in blue and purple
and scarlet yarns and fine twined linen. 26All the women y whose hearts
stirred them to use their skill spun the goats’ hair.
27And the e leaders
brought onyx stones and stones to be set, for the ephod and for the
breastpiece, 28and spices and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and
for the fragrant incense. 29 f All the men and women, the people of Israel,
whose heart moved them to bring anything for the work that the LORD had
commanded by Moses to be done brought it as a freewill offering to the
LORD.
Construction of the Tabernacle
30[†] g Then Moses said to the people of Israel, “See, the LORD has called by
name Bezalel the son of Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah; 31[†]and he
has filled him with the Spirit of God, with h skill, with intelligence, with
knowledge, and with all craftsmanship, 32to devise artistic designs, to work
in gold and silver and bronze, 33in cutting stones for setting, and in carving
wood, for work in every skilled craft. 34And he has inspired him to teach,
both him and Oholiab the son of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan. 35He has
h filled them with skill to do every sort of work done by an engraver or by a
designer or by an embroiderer in blue and purple and scarlet yarns and fine
twined linen, or by a weaver—by any sort of workman or skilled designer.
EXODUS 36 “Bezalel and Oholiab and i every craftsman in whom the
LORD has put skill and intelligence to know how to do any work in the
construction of the sanctuary shall work in accordance with all that the
LORD has commanded.”
2[†]And Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab and every craftsman in whose
mind the LORD had put skill, everyone j whose heart stirred him up to come
to do the work. 3And they received from Moses all the k contribution that
the people of Israel had brought for doing the work on the sanctuary. They
still kept bringing him l freewill offerings every morning, 4so that all the
craftsmen who were doing every sort of task on the sanctuary came, each
from the task that he was doing, 5and said to Moses, m “The people bring
much more than enough for doing the work that the LORD has commanded
us to do.” 6So Moses gave command, and word was proclaimed throughout
the camp, “Let no man or woman do anything more for the n contribution
for the sanctuary.” So the people were restrained from bringing, 7for the
material they had was sufficient to do all the work, and more.
8 o And all the craftsmen among the workmen made the tabernacle with
ten curtains. They were made of fine twined linen and blue and purple and
scarlet yarns, with cherubim skillfully worked. 9The length of each curtain
was twenty-eight cubits, [1] and the breadth of each curtain four cubits. All
the curtains were the same size.
10[†]He [2] coupled five curtains to one another, and the other five
curtains he coupled to one another.
11He made loops of blue on the edge of
the outermost curtain of the first set. Likewise he made them on the edge of
the outermost curtain of the second set. 12He made fifty loops on the one
curtain, and he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was in the
second set. The loops were opposite one another.
13And he made fifty
clasps of gold, and coupled the curtains one to the other with clasps. So the
tabernacle was a single whole.
14He also made curtains of goats’ hair for a tent over the tabernacle. He
made eleven curtains. 15The length of each curtain was thirty cubits, and the
breadth of each curtain four cubits. The eleven curtains were the same size.
16He coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
17And he made fifty loops on the edge of the outermost curtain of the one
set, and fifty loops on the edge of the other connecting curtain. 18And he
made fifty clasps of bronze to couple the tent together that it might be a
single whole. 19And he made for the tent a covering of tanned rams’ skins
and goatskins.
20
p Then he made the upright frames for the tabernacle of q acacia wood.
21Ten cubits was the length of a frame, and a cubit and a half the breadth of
each frame. 22Each frame had two tenons for fitting together. He did this for
all the frames of the tabernacle. 23The frames for the tabernacle he made
thus: twenty frames for the south side. 24And he made forty bases of silver
under the twenty frames, two bases under one frame for its two tenons, and
two bases under the next frame for its two tenons. 25For the second side of
the tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty frames 26and their forty
bases of silver, two bases under one frame and two bases under the next
frame. 27For the rear of the tabernacle westward he made six frames. 28He
made two frames for corners of the tabernacle in the rear.
29And they were
separate beneath but joined at the top, at the first ring. He made two of them
this way for the two corners. 30There were eight frames with their bases of
silver: sixteen bases, under every frame two bases.
31He made bars of acacia wood, five for the frames of the one side of the
tabernacle, 32and five bars for the frames of the other side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the frames of the tabernacle at the rear westward. 33And he
made the middle bar to run from end to end halfway up the frames. 34And
he overlaid the frames with gold, and made their rings of gold for holders
for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.
35
r He made the veil of blue and purple and scarlet yarns and fine twined
linen; with cherubim skillfully worked into it he made it. 36And for it he
made four pillars of acacia and overlaid them with gold. Their hooks were
of gold, and he cast for them four bases of silver.
37He also made a screen
for the entrance of the tent, of blue and purple and scarlet yarns and fine
twined linen, embroidered with needlework, 38and its five pillars with their
hooks. He overlaid their capitals, and their fillets were of gold, but their five
bases were of bronze.
Making the Ark