EXODUS 18 [†] m Jethro, n the priest of Midian, Moses’ father-in-law, heard
of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel his people, how the LORD
had brought Israel out of Egypt. 2[†]Now Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, had
taken Zipporah, Moses’ wife, after he had sent her home, 3[†]along with her
o two sons. The name of the one was Gershom ( p for he said, q “I have been
a sojourner [1] in a foreign land”), 4and the name of the other, Eliezer [2] (for
he said, “The God of my father was my help, and delivered me from the
sword of Pharaoh”). 5[†]Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, came with his sons
and his wife to Moses in the wilderness where he was encamped at the
r mountain of God. 6And when he sent word to Moses, “I, [3] your father-in-
law Jethro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons with her,”
7Moses s went out to meet his father-in-law and bowed down and t kissed
him. And they asked each other of their welfare and went into the tent.
8[†]Then Moses told his father-in-law u all that the LORD had done to
Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, all the hardship that had
come upon them in the way, and how the LORD had delivered them. 9And
Jethro rejoiced for all the good that the LORD had done to Israel, in that he
had delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians.
10Jethro said, v “Blessed be the LORD, who has delivered you out of the
hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of Pharaoh and has delivered the
people from under the hand of the Egyptians. 11Now I know that w the LORD
is greater than all gods, because in this affair they x dealt arrogantly with the
people.” [4] 12And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, brought a burnt offering and
sacrifices to God; and Aaron came with all the elders of Israel to eat bread
with Moses’ father-in-law y before God.
13[†]The next day Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood
around Moses from morning till evening. 14When Moses’ father-in-law saw
all that he was doing for the people, he said, “What is this that you are
doing for the people? Why do you sit alone, and all the people stand around
you from morning till evening?” 15And Moses said to his father-in-law,
“Because z the people come to me to inquire of God; 16 a when they have a
dispute, they come to me and I decide between one person and another, and
I b make them know the statutes of God and his laws.” 17Moses’ father-in-
law said to him, “What you are doing is not good. 18You and the people
with you will certainly wear yourselves out, for the thing is too heavy for
you. c You are not able to do it alone. 19Now obey my voice; I will give you
advice, and God be with you! You shall d represent the people before God
and e bring their cases to God, 20and you shall warn them about the statutes
and the laws, and make them know f the way in which they must walk and
g what they must do. 21Moreover, look for h able men from all the people,
men who fear God, who are trustworthy and hate a bribe, and place such
men over the people as chiefs of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of
tens. 22And i let them judge the people at all times. j Every great matter they
shall bring to you, but any small matter they shall decide themselves. So it
will be easier for you, and they will k bear the burden with you. 23If you do
this, God will direct you, you will be l able to endure, and all this people
also will go to their place in peace.”
24So Moses listened to the voice of his father-in-law and did all that he
had said. 25 m Moses chose able men out of all Israel and made them heads
over the people, chiefs of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens.
26And n they judged the people at all times. Any hard case they brought to
Moses, but any small matter they decided themselves. 27Then Moses let his
father-in-law depart, and o he went away to his own country.
Israel at Mount Sinai