EZEKIEL 13 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2 a “Son of man,
prophesy against the prophets of Israel, who are prophesying, and say to
those b who prophesy from their own hearts: ‘Hear the word of the LORD!’
3Thus says the Lord GOD, Woe to the foolish prophets who follow their own
spirit, and have seen nothing! 4Your prophets have been like jackals among
ruins, O Israel. 5
c You have not gone up into the breaches, or built up a wall
for the house of Israel, that it might stand in battle in the day of the LORD.
6 d They have seen false visions and lying divinations. They say, ‘Declares
the LORD,’ e when the LORD has not sent them, and yet they expect him to
fulfill their word. 7Have you not seen a false vision and uttered a lying
divination, f whenever you have said, ‘Declares the LORD,’ although I have
not spoken?”
8Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: “Because you have uttered falsehood
and seen lying visions, therefore behold, g I am against you, declares the
Lord GOD.
9My hand will be against the prophets who see false visions and
who give lying divinations. They shall not be in the council of my people,
h nor be enrolled in the register of the house of Israel, i nor shall they enter
the land of Israel. j And you shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
10[†]Precisely because they have misled my people, k saying, ‘Peace,’ when
there is no peace, and because, when the people build a wall, l these
prophets smear it with whitewash, [1] 11say to those who smear it with
whitewash that it shall fall! m There will be a deluge of rain, and you, O
great hailstones, will fall, and a stormy wind break out. 12And when the
wall falls, will it not be said to you, ‘Where is the coating with which you
smeared it?’ 13Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: m I will make a stormy
wind break out in my wrath, m and there shall be a deluge of rain in my
anger, and great hailstones in wrath to make a full end. 14And I will break
down the wall that you have smeared with whitewash, and bring it down to
the ground, so that its foundation will be laid bare. When it falls, you shall
perish in the midst of it, n and you shall know that I am the LORD.
15Thus
will I spend my wrath upon the wall and upon those who have smeared it
with whitewash, and I will say to you, The wall is no more, nor those who
smeared it, 16the prophets of Israel who prophesied concerning Jerusalem
k and saw visions of peace for her, when there was no peace, declares the
Lord GOD.
17[†]“And you, son of man, o set your face against p the daughters of
your people, q who prophesy out of their own hearts. Prophesy against them
18and say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Woe to the women r who sew magic
bands upon all wrists, and s make veils for the heads of persons of every
stature, in t the hunt for souls! Will you hunt down souls belonging to my
people and keep your own souls alive? 19You have profaned me among my
people u for handfuls of barley v and for pieces of bread, putting to death
souls who should not die and keeping alive souls who should not live, by
your lying to my people, who listen to lies.
20“Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, w I am against x your
magic bands with which you hunt the souls like birds, and I will tear them
from your arms, and I will let the souls whom you hunt go free, the souls
like birds. 21Your veils also I will tear off and y deliver my people out of
your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand as prey, z and you shall
know that I am the LORD.
22[†] a Because you have disheartened the
righteous falsely, although I have not grieved him, and b you have
encouraged the wicked, that c he should not turn from his evil way to save
his life, 23 d therefore you shall no more see false visions nor practice
divination. I will deliver my people out of your hand. And you shall know
that I am the LORD.”
Idolatrous Elders Condemned