EZEKIEL 25 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2 w “Son of man, x set
your face toward y the Ammonites and prophesy against them. 3[†]Say to
the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord GOD: z Thus says the Lord GOD,
Because you said, a ‘Aha!’ over my b sanctuary when it was profaned, and
over the land of Israel when it was made desolate, and over the house of
Judah when they went into exile, 4[†]therefore behold, I am handing you
over to c the people of the East for a possession, and they shall set their
encampments among you and make their dwellings in your midst. They
shall eat your fruit, and they shall drink your milk. 5I will make d Rabbah a
e pasture for camels and Ammon [1] e a fold for flocks. v Then you will
know that I am the LORD.
6For thus says the Lord GOD: Because f you have
clapped your hands g and stamped your feet and h rejoiced with all the
i malice within your soul against the land of Israel, 7therefore, behold, j I
have stretched out my hand against you, and k will hand you over as
plunder to the nations. And I will cut you off from the peoples and will
make you perish out of the countries; I will destroy you. Then you will
know that I am the LORD.
Prophecy Against Moab and Seir
8“Thus says the Lord GOD: Because l Moab and m Seir [2] said, ‘Behold, the
n house of Judah is like all the other nations,’ 9therefore l I will lay open the
flank of Moab from the cities, from its cities on its frontier, the glory of the
country, o Beth-jeshimoth, p Baal-meon, and q Kiriathaim. 10I will give it
r along with the Ammonites s to the people of the East as a possession, t that
the Ammonites may be remembered no more among the nations, 11 l and I
will execute judgments upon Moab. u Then they will know that I am the
LORD.
Prophecy Against Edom
12[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: Because v Edom acted revengefully against
the house of Judah and has grievously offended w in taking vengeance on
them, 13therefore thus says the Lord GOD, x I will stretch out my hand
against Edom and cut off from it man and beast. And I will make it
desolate; from y Teman even to z Dedan they shall fall by the sword. 14And
I will lay my vengeance upon Edom a by the hand of my people Israel, and
they shall do in Edom according to my anger and according to my wrath,
and b they shall know my vengeance, declares the Lord GOD.
Prophecy Against Philistia
15“Thus says the Lord GOD: Because c the Philistines d acted revengefully
and took vengeance e with malice of soul to destroy in never-ending enmity,
16therefore thus says the Lord GOD, x Behold, I will stretch out my hand
against the Philistines, and I will cut off f the Cherethites and destroy the
rest of the seacoast. 17I will execute great vengeance on them g with
wrathful rebukes. h Then they will know that I am the LORD, when I lay my
vengeance upon them.”
Prophecy Against Tyre