EZEKIEL 45 [†]“When e you allot the land as an inheritance, f you shall set
apart for the LORD a portion of the land as a holy district, 25,000 cubits [1]
long and 20,000 [2] cubits broad. It shall be holy throughout its whole
extent. 2
g Of this a square plot of 500 by 500 cubits shall be for the
sanctuary, with fifty cubits for h an open space around it. 3And i from this
measured district you shall measure off a section 25,000 cubits long and
10,000 broad, j in which shall be the sanctuary, k the Most Holy Place. 4 l It
shall be the holy portion of the land. It shall be for the priests, who minister
in the sanctuary and approach the LORD to minister to him, and it shall be a
place for their houses and a holy place for the sanctuary.
5
m Another
section, 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 cubits broad, shall be for the Levites
who minister at the temple, as their possession for cities to live in. [3]
6“Alongside the portion set apart as the holy district n you shall assign for
the property of the city an area 5,000 cubits broad and 25,000 cubits long.
o It shall belong to the whole house of Israel.
The Portion for the Prince
7 p “And to q the prince shall belong the land on both sides of the holy
district and the property of the city, alongside the holy district and the
property of the city, on the west and on the east, corresponding in length to
one of the tribal portions, and extending from the western to the eastern
boundary 8of the land. It is to be his property in Israel. And r my princes
shall no more oppress my people, but s they shall let the house of Israel
have the land according to their tribes.
9[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: t Enough, O princes of Israel! Put away
violence and oppression, and execute justice and righteousness. Cease
u your evictions of my people, declares the Lord GOD.
10 v “You shall have just balances, a just ephah, and a just bath. [4] 11The
ephah and the bath shall be w of the same measure, x the bath containing
one tenth of a homer, [5] and the ephah one tenth of a homer; the homer
shall be the standard measure. 12 y The shekel shall be twenty gerahs; [6]
twenty shekels plus twenty-five shekels plus fifteen shekels shall be your
mina. [7]
13[†] z “This is the offering that you shall make: one sixth of an ephah
from each homer of wheat, and one sixth of an ephah from each homer of
barley,
14and as the fixed portion of oil, measured in baths, one tenth of a
bath from each cor [8] (the cor, like the homer, contains a ten baths). [9]
15And one sheep from every flock of two hundred, from the watering places
of Israel for grain offering, burnt offering, and peace offerings, b to make
atonement for them, declares the Lord GOD.
16All the people of the land
shall be obliged to give this offering to the prince in Israel. 17 c It shall be the
prince’s duty to furnish the burnt offerings, grain offerings, and drink
offerings, at the feasts, the new moons, and the Sabbaths, all the appointed
feasts of the house of Israel: he shall provide the sin offerings, grain
offerings, burnt offerings, and peace offerings, to make atonement on behalf
of the house of Israel.
18[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: In the first month, d on the first day of the
month, you shall take a bull from the herd without blemish, and e purify the
sanctuary.
19 f The priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering and
put it g on the doorposts of the temple, the four corners of the ledge of the
altar, and the posts of the gate of the inner court. 20You shall do the same on
the seventh day of the month for anyone who has sinned through error or
ignorance; so you shall make atonement for the temple.
21 h “In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, you shall
celebrate the Feast of the Passover, and for seven days unleavened bread
shall be eaten. 22On that day the prince i shall provide for himself and all
the people of the land a young bull for a sin offering. 23And on j the seven
days of the festival he shall provide as a burnt offering to the LORD seven
young bulls and seven rams without blemish, on each of the seven days;
and k a male goat daily for a sin offering. 24And l he shall provide as m a
grain offering an ephah for each bull, an ephah for each ram, and a hin [10]
of oil to each ephah. 25 n In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the
month and for the seven days of the feast, o he shall make the same
provision for sin offerings, burnt offerings, and grain offerings, and for the
oil.
The Prince and the Feasts