EZEKIEL 38 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] k “Son of man, l set
your face toward m Gog, of the land of n Magog, the o chief prince of
p Meshech [1] and p Tubal, and q prophesy against him 3and say, Thus says
the Lord GOD: Behold, r I am against you, O Gog, chief prince of
Meshech [2] and Tubal. 4 s And I will turn you about and t put hooks into
your jaws, and I will bring you out, and u all your army, horses and
horsemen, all of them clothed in full armor, a great host, all of them with
buckler and shield, wielding swords. 5[†] v Persia, w Cush, and v Put are with
them, all of them with shield and helmet; 6[†] x Gomer and all his y hordes;
z Beth-togarmah from a the uttermost parts of the north with all his hordes
— u many peoples are with you.
7 b “Be ready and keep ready, you and all your hosts that are assembled
about you, and be a guard for them. 8[†] c After many days you will be
mustered. d In the latter years you will go against d the land that is restored
from war, the land whose people e were gathered from many peoples upon
f the mountains of Israel, which had been a continual waste. Its people were
brought out from the peoples and g now dwell securely, all of them. 9You
will advance, coming on h like a storm. You will be i like a cloud covering
the land, you and all your y hordes, and many peoples with you.
10[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: On that day, j thoughts will come into
your mind, and you will devise an evil scheme 11and say, ‘I will go up
against k the land of unwalled villages. I will fall upon l the quiet people
who dwell securely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having no bars
or gates,’ 12to seize spoil and carry off plunder, to turn your hand against
m the waste places that are now inhabited, and m the people who were
gathered from the nations, who have acquired livestock and goods, n who
dwell at the center of the earth. 13 o Sheba and p Dedan and the merchants of
Tarshish and all q its leaders [3] will say to you, ‘Have you come to seize
spoil? Have you assembled your hosts to carry off plunder, to carry away
silver and gold, to take away livestock and goods, to seize great spoil?’
14“Therefore, r son of man, prophesy, and say to s Gog, Thus says the
Lord GOD: On that day when my people Israel are g dwelling securely, t will
you not know it? 15You will come from your place out of u the uttermost
parts of the north, you and v many peoples with you, w all of them riding on
horses, a great host, a mighty army.
16[†]You will come up against my
people Israel, i like a cloud covering the land. x In the latter days I will
bring you against my land, that the nations may know me, when through
you, O Gog, y I vindicate my holiness before their eyes.
17“Thus says the Lord GOD: Are you z he of whom I spoke in former days
by my servants the prophets of Israel, who in those days prophesied for
years that I would bring you against them? 18But on that day, the day that
Gog shall come against the land of Israel, declares the Lord GOD, a my
wrath will be roused in my anger.
19For b in my jealousy and in my blazing
wrath I declare, On that day c there shall be a great earthquake in the land of
Israel. 20
d The fish of the sea and the birds of the heavens and the beasts of
the field and all creeping things that creep on the ground, and all the people
who are on the face of the earth, e shall quake at my presence. And f the
mountains shall be thrown down, and the cliffs shall fall, and every wall
shall tumble to the ground. 21 g I will summon a sword against Gog [4] on all
my mountains, declares the Lord GOD. h Every man’s sword will be against
his brother.
22With pestilence and bloodshed i I will enter into judgment
with him, and j I will rain upon him and k his hordes and the many peoples
who are with him l torrential rains and hailstones, m fire and sulfur.
23So I
will show my greatness and my n holiness and o make myself known in the
eyes of many nations. Then p they will know that I am the LORD.