EZEKIEL 8 [†] d In the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the
month, e as I sat in my house, with f the elders of Judah sitting before me,
g the hand of the Lord GOD fell upon me there. 2Then I looked, and behold,
h a form that had the appearance of a man. [1] h Below what appeared to be
his waist was fire, and above his waist was something like the appearance
of brightness, like i gleaming metal. [2] 3[†]He j put out the form of a hand
and took me by a lock of my head, and the Spirit lifted me up k between
earth and heaven and l brought me in m visions of God to Jerusalem, n to the
entrance of the gateway of the inner court that faces north, o where was the
seat of the p image of jealousy, q which provokes to jealousy.
4[†]And
behold, r the glory of the God of Israel was there, like the vision that I saw
s in the valley.
5[†]Then he said to me, t “Son of man, lift up your eyes now toward the
north.” So I lifted up my eyes toward the north, and behold, north of u the
altar gate, in the entrance, was this p image of jealousy.
6And he said to me,
“Son of man, v do you see what they are doing, w the great abominations
that the house of Israel are committing here, x to drive me far from my
sanctuary? But you will see still greater abominations.”
7And he brought me to the entrance of the court, and when I looked,
behold, there was a hole in the wall. 8Then he said to me, “Son of man,
y dig in the wall.” So I dug in the wall, and behold, there was an entrance.
9And he said to me, “Go in, and see z the vile abominations that they are
committing here.” 10[†]So I went in and saw. And there, a engraved on the
wall all around, was b every form of c creeping things and loathsome beasts,
and all the idols of the house of Israel. 11[†]And before them stood
d seventy men of e the elders of the house of Israel, with Jaazaniah the son
of f Shaphan standing among them. Each had his censer in his hand, and
g the smoke of the cloud of incense went up. 12Then he said to me, “Son of
man, have you seen what the elders of the house of Israel are doing h in the
dark, each i in his room of pictures? For they say, j ‘The LORD does not see
us, the LORD has forsaken the land.’” 13He said also to me, k “You will see
still greater abominations that they commit.”
14[†]Then he brought me to l the entrance of the north gate of the house
of the LORD, and behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz. 15Then he
said to me, “Have you seen this, O t son of man? k You will see still greater
abominations than these.”
16[†]And he brought me into m the inner court of the house of the LORD.
And behold, at the entrance of the temple of the LORD, n between the
o porch and p the altar, were about twenty-five men, q with their backs to
the temple of the LORD, and their faces toward the east, worshiping r the sun
toward the east. 17Then he said to me, “Have you seen this, O s son of man?
Is it too light a thing for the house of Judah to commit t the abominations
that they commit here, that u they should fill the land with violence and
v provoke me still further to anger? Behold, they put the branch to their [3]
nose. 18Therefore w I will act in wrath. x My eye will not spare, nor will I
have pity. y And though they cry in my ears with a loud voice, I will not
hear them.”
Idolaters Killed