EZEKIEL 16 [†]Again the word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] b “Son of man,
c make known to Jerusalem her abominations, 3and say, Thus says the Lord
GOD to Jerusalem: Your origin and your birth are of the land of the
Canaanites; your father was an d Amorite and your mother a e Hittite.
4[†]And as for your birth, f on the day you were born your cord was not cut,
nor were you washed with water to cleanse you, nor rubbed with salt, nor
wrapped in swaddling cloths. 5No eye pitied you, to do any of these things
to you out of compassion for you, g but you were cast out on the open field,
for you were abhorred, f on the day that you were born.
6[†]“And when I passed by you and saw you wallowing h in your blood, I
said to you h in your blood, ‘Live!’ I said to you h in your blood, ‘Live!’
7[†] i I made you flourish like a plant of the field. And you grew up and
became tall j and arrived at full adornment. Your breasts were formed, and
your hair had grown; yet k you were naked and bare.
8[†]“When I passed by you again and saw you, behold, you were at the
age for love, and l I spread the corner of my garment over you and covered
your nakedness; I made my vow to you m and entered into a covenant with
you, declares the Lord GOD, n and you became mine. 9[†]Then I bathed you
with water and washed off your blood from you and o anointed you with oil.
10[†] p I clothed you also with embroidered cloth and shod you with fine
leather. I wrapped you in fine linen and covered you with silk. [1] 11 q And I
adorned you with ornaments and r put bracelets on your wrists and a chain
on your neck. 12And I put a ring on your nose and earrings in your ears and
a beautiful crown on your head. 13Thus you were adorned with gold and
silver, and your clothing was of fine linen and silk and embroidered cloth.
s You ate fine flour and honey and oil. t You grew exceedingly beautiful and
advanced to royalty.
14[†]And u your renown went forth among the nations
because of your beauty, for it was perfect through the splendor that I had
bestowed on you, declares the Lord GOD.
15[†] v “But you trusted in your beauty w and played the whore [2] because
of your renown x and lavished your whorings [3] on any passerby; your
beauty [4] became his. 16You took some of your garments and made for
yourself colorful shrines, and on them played the whore. The like has never
been, nor ever shall be. [5] 17You also took y your beautiful jewels of my
gold and of my silver, which I had given you, and z made for yourself
images of men, and with them played the whore. 18And you took your
embroidered garments to cover them, a and set my oil and my incense
before them. 19
b Also my bread that I gave you— s I fed you with fine flour
and oil and honey—you set before them for c a pleasing aroma; and so it
was, declares the Lord GOD.
20 d And you took your sons and your
daughters, whom you had borne to me, and e these you sacrificed to them to
be devoured. Were your whorings so small a matter 21that you slaughtered
my children and delivered them up as an offering by fire to them? 22And in
all your abominations and your whorings you did not remember f the days
of your youth, g when you were naked and bare, wallowing in your blood.
23[†]“And after all your wickedness (woe, woe to you! declares the Lord
GOD), 24you built yourself h a vaulted chamber and made yourself a lofty
place in every square. 25At the head of every street i you built your lofty
place and made j your beauty an abomination, k offering yourself [6] to any
passerby and multiplying your whoring. 26
w You also played the whore
l with the Egyptians, your lustful neighbors, m multiplying your whoring,
n to provoke me to anger.
27Behold, therefore, I stretched out my hand
against you o and diminished your allotted portion p and delivered you to
the greed of your enemies, q the daughters of the Philistines, who were
ashamed of your lewd behavior.
28
w You played the whore also r with the
Assyrians, because you were not satisfied; yes, you played the whore with
them, and still you were not satisfied. 29You multiplied your whoring also
with the trading land t of Chaldea, and even with this you were not satisfied.
30[†]“How sick is your heart, [7] declares the Lord GOD, because you did
all these things, the deeds of a brazen prostitute, 31building your vaulted
chamber at the head of every street, and making your lofty place in every
square. Yet you were not like a prostitute, u because you scorned payment.
32Adulterous wife, who receives strangers instead of her husband! 33Men
give gifts to all prostitutes, v but you gave your gifts to all your lovers,
bribing them to come to you from every side with your whorings. 34So you
were different from other women in your whorings. No one solicited you to
play the whore, and v you gave payment, while no payment was given to
you; therefore you were different.
35[†]“Therefore, O prostitute, hear the word of the LORD: 36Thus says the
Lord GOD, Because your lust was poured out and your nakedness uncovered
in your whorings with your lovers, and with all your abominable idols,
w and because of the blood of your children that you gave to them,
37therefore, behold, x I will gather all your lovers with whom you took
pleasure, all those you loved and y all those you hated. z I will gather them
against you from every side a and will uncover your nakedness to them, that
b they may see all your nakedness. 38 c And I will judge you d as women
who commit adultery and e shed blood are judged, and bring upon you the
blood of wrath and jealousy.
39And I will give you into their hands, and
they shall throw down your f vaulted chamber and break down g your lofty
places. h They shall strip you of your clothes and take i your beautiful
jewels and leave you j naked and bare. 40 k They shall bring up a crowd
against you, l and they shall stone you and cut you to pieces with their
swords. 41
l And they shall m burn your houses and n execute judgments
upon you in the sight of many women. o I will make you stop playing the
whore, and p you shall also give payment no more. 42 q So will I satisfy my
wrath on you, and my jealousy shall depart from you. I will be calm and
will no more be angry.
43Because you have not remembered r the days of
your youth, but have enraged me with all these things, therefore, behold, s I
have returned your deeds upon your head, declares the Lord GOD. Have you
not t committed lewdness in addition to all your abominations?
44“Behold, everyone u who uses proverbs will use this proverb about
you: ‘Like mother, like daughter.’ 45You are the daughter of your mother,
who loathed her husband and her children; and you are the sister of v your
sisters, who loathed their husbands and their children. w Your mother was a
Hittite and w your father an Amorite. 46And x your elder sister is Samaria,
who lived with her daughters to the north of you; and y your younger sister,
who lived to the south of you, is Sodom with her daughters. 47 z Not only
did you walk in their ways and do according to their abominations; within a
very little time a you were more corrupt than they in all your ways. 48 b As I
live, declares the Lord GOD, your sister c Sodom and her daughters have not
done as you and your daughters have done. 49[†]Behold, this was the guilt
of your sister Sodom: she and her daughters had pride, d excess of food, and
prosperous ease, but did not aid the poor and needy.
50They were haughty
and e did an abomination before me. So f I removed them, when I saw it.
51
g Samaria has not committed half your sins. You have committed more
abominations than they, and h have made your sisters appear righteous by
all the abominations that you have committed. 52 i Bear your disgrace, you
also, for you have intervened on behalf of your sisters. Because of your sins
in which you acted more abominably than they, they are more in the right
than you. So be ashamed, you also, and bear your disgrace, for you have
made your sisters appear righteous.
53[†] j “I will restore their fortunes, both the fortunes of Sodom and her
daughters, and the fortunes of Samaria and her daughters, and I will restore
your own fortunes in their midst, 54that you may bear your disgrace k and
be ashamed of all that you have done, l becoming a consolation to them.
55As for your sisters, Sodom and her daughters shall return to their former
state, j and Samaria and her daughters shall return m to their former state,
j and you and your daughters shall return m to your former state. 56Was not
your sister Sodom a byword in your mouth n in the day of your pride,
57before your wickedness was uncovered? Now you have become o an
object of reproach for the daughters of Syria [8] and all those around her,
and for p the daughters of the Philistines, q those all around who despise
you. 58 r You bear the penalty of your lewdness and your abominations,
declares the LORD.
The LORD’s Everlasting Covenant
59“For thus says the Lord GOD: I will deal with you as you have done, you
s who have despised the oath in breaking the covenant, 60[†]yet t I will
remember my covenant with you u in the days of your youth, v and I will
establish for you an everlasting covenant. 61
w Then you will remember your
ways x and be ashamed when you take y your sisters, both your elder and
your younger, and I give them to you z as daughters, but not on account
of [9] the covenant with you. 62I will establish my covenant with you, a and
you shall know that I am the LORD,
63that you may remember and be
confounded, and b never open your mouth again because of your shame,
when I atone for you for all that you have done, declares the Lord GOD.”
Parable of Two Eagles and a Vine