EZEKIEL 27 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2“Now you, t son of
man, u raise a lamentation over Tyre, 3and say to Tyre, who dwells at v the
entrances to the sea, w merchant of the peoples to many coastlands, thus
says the Lord GOD:
“O Tyre, you have said,
‘I am x perfect in beauty.’
4 Your borders are y in the heart of the seas;
your builders made perfect your beauty.
5 They made all your planks
of fir trees from z Senir;
they took a a cedar from Lebanon
to make a mast for you.
6 Of b oaks of Bashan
they made your oars;
they made your deck of pines
from c the coasts of Cyprus,
inlaid with ivory.
7 d Of fine embroidered linen from Egypt
was your sail,
serving as your banner;
blue and purple from c the coasts of Elishah
was your awning.
8[†] The inhabitants of Sidon and e Arvad
were your rowers;
your skilled men, O Tyre, were in you;
they were f your pilots.
9 The elders of g Gebal and her skilled men were in you,
h caulking your seams;
all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in you
to barter for your wares.
10[†] i “Persia and j Lud and i Put were in your army as your men of war.
k They hung the shield and helmet in you; they gave you splendor.
11[†]Men
of e Arvad and Helech were on your walls all around, and men of Gamad
were in your towers. They hung their shields on your walls all around; they
made x perfect your beauty.
12[†] l “Tarshish did m business with you because of your great wealth of
every kind; silver, iron, tin, and lead they exchanged for your n wares.
13[†] o Javan, p Tubal, and p Meshech traded with you; they exchanged
human beings and vessels of bronze for your merchandise. 14From q Beth-
togarmah they exchanged horses, war horses, and mules r for your wares.
15The men of s Dedan [1] traded with you. Many coastlands were your own
special markets; they brought you in payment ivory tusks and ebony.
16Syria t did business with you because of your abundant goods; they
exchanged for your wares u emeralds, u purple, v embroidered work, w fine
linen, coral, and x ruby.
17Judah and the land of Israel traded with you; they
exchanged for your merchandise y wheat of z Minnith, meal, [2] honey, oil,
and a balm. 18
b Damascus did business with you for your abundant goods,
because of your great wealth of every kind; wine of Helbon and c wool of
Sahar 19and casks of wine [3] from Uzal they exchanged for your wares;
wrought iron, d cassia, and e calamus were bartered for your merchandise.
20Dedan traded with you in saddlecloths for riding. 21Arabia and all the
princes of f Kedar were your favored dealers f in lambs, rams, and goats; in
these they did business with you. 22The traders of g Sheba and g Raamah
traded with you; they exchanged h for your wares i the best of all kinds of
spices and all precious stones and gold. 23 j Haran, Canneh, j Eden, traders
of Sheba, k Asshur, and Chilmad traded with you. 24In your market these
traded with you in choice garments, in clothes of l blue and l embroidered
work, and in carpets of colored material, bound with cords and made
secure. 25 m The ships of n Tarshish traveled for you with your merchandise.
So you were filled and heavily laden o in the heart of the seas.
26 “Your rowers have brought you out
into the high seas.
p The east wind has wrecked you
in the heart of the seas.
27 Your riches, your wares, your merchandise,
your mariners and q your pilots,
r your caulkers, your dealers in merchandise,
and all your men of war who are in you,
with all your crew
that is in your midst,
sink into the heart of the seas
s on the day of your fall.
28 At the sound of the cry of your pilots
t the countryside shakes,
29 and down from their ships
u come all who handle the oar.
The mariners and all the pilots of the sea
stand on the land
30 u and shout aloud over you
and cry out bitterly.
v They cast dust on their heads
w and wallow in ashes;
31 they x make themselves bald for you
and put sackcloth on their waist,
and they weep over you in bitterness of soul,
with bitter mourning.
32 In their wailing they y raise a lamentation for you
and lament over you:
z ‘Who is like Tyre,
like one destroyed in the midst of the sea?
33 When your wares came from the seas,
a you satisfied many peoples;
with your abundant wealth and merchandise
a you enriched the kings of the earth.
34 Now b you are wrecked by the seas,
in the depths of the waters;
your merchandise and all your crew in your midst
have sunk with you.
35
c All the inhabitants of the coastlands
are appalled at you,
and d the hair of their kings bristles with horror;
their faces are convulsed.
36 e The merchants among the peoples f hiss at you;
g you have come to a dreadful end
and shall be no more forever.’”
Prophecy Against the Prince of Tyre