EZEKIEL 40 [†] w In the twenty-fifth year x of our exile, at the beginning of
the year, on the tenth day of the month, y in the fourteenth year after the city
was struck down, on that very day, z the hand of the LORD was upon me,
and he brought me to the city. [1] 2In a visions of God he brought me to the
land of Israel, and set me down on b a very high mountain, on which was a
structure like a city to the south. 3When he brought me there, behold, there
was c a man whose appearance was d like bronze, with e a linen cord and f a
measuring reed in his hand. And he was standing in the gateway.
4And the
man said to me, g “Son of man, h look with your eyes, and h hear with your
ears, and set your heart upon all that I shall show you, for you were brought
here in order that I might show it to you. i Declare all that you see to the
house of Israel.”
The East Gate to the Outer Court
5[†]And behold, there was j a wall all around the outside of the temple area,
and the length of the measuring reed in the man’s hand was six long cubits,
k each being a cubit and a handbreadth [2] in length. So he measured the
thickness of the wall, one reed; and the height, one reed. 6Then he went into
l the gateway facing east, m going up its steps, and measured the threshold
of the gate, one reed deep. [3] 7And n the side rooms, one reed long and one
reed broad; and the space between the side rooms, five cubits; and the
threshold of the gate by the vestibule of the gate at the inner end, one reed.
8Then he measured the vestibule of the gateway, on the inside, one reed.
9Then he measured the vestibule of the gateway, eight cubits; o and its
jambs, two cubits; and the vestibule of the gate was at the inner end. 10And
there were three side rooms on either side of the east gate. p The three were
of the same size, and the jambs on either side were of the same size. 11Then
he measured the width of the opening of the gateway, ten cubits; and the
length of the gateway, thirteen cubits. 12There was a barrier before the side
rooms, one cubit on either side. And the side rooms were six cubits on
either side. 13Then he measured the gate from the ceiling of the one side
room to the ceiling of the other, a breadth of twenty-five cubits; the
openings faced each other.
14He measured also q the vestibule, twenty
cubits. And around the vestibule of the gateway was the court. [4] 15From
the front of the gate at the entrance to the front of the inner vestibule of the
gate was fifty cubits. 16And the gateway had r windows all around,
narrowing inwards toward the side rooms and toward their s jambs, and
likewise the vestibule had windows all around inside, and on the jambs
were t palm trees.
The Outer Court
17Then he brought me into u the outer court. And behold, there were
v chambers and a w pavement, all around the court. x Thirty chambers faced
the pavement. 18And the pavement ran along the side of the gates,
corresponding to the length of the gates. This was the lower pavement.
19Then he measured the distance from the inner front of the lower gate to
the outer front of the inner court, [5] a hundred cubits on the east side and on
the north side. [6]
The North Gate
20As for y the gate that faced toward the north, belonging to u the outer
court, he measured its length and its breadth. 21Its n side rooms, three on
either side, and its jambs and its vestibule were of the same size as those of
z the first gate. Its length was a fifty cubits, and its breadth b twenty-five
cubits. 22And c its windows, its vestibule, and c its palm trees were of the
same size as those of the gate that faced toward the east. And by seven steps
d people would go up to it, and find its vestibule before them. 23And
opposite the gate on the north, as on the east, was a gate to e the inner court.
And f he measured from gate to gate, a hundred cubits.
The South Gate
24And he led me toward the south, and behold, there was a gate on the
south. And g he measured its jambs and its vestibule; they had the same size
as the others. 25Both it and its vestibule h had windows all around, like the
windows of the others. Its length was fifty cubits, and its breadth twenty-
five cubits. 26And there were seven steps leading up to it, and its vestibule
was before them, and it had i palm trees on its jambs, one on either side.
27And there was a gate on the south of j the inner court. And he measured
from gate to gate toward the south, a hundred cubits.
The Inner Court
28[†]Then he brought me to j the inner court through the south gate, and
k he measured the south gate. It was of the same size as the others. 29Its
l side rooms, its jambs, and its vestibule were of the same size as the others,
and both it and its vestibule m had windows all around. m Its length was
fifty cubits, and its breadth twenty-five cubits. 30And there were vestibules
all around, twenty-five cubits long and five cubits broad. 31Its vestibule
faced the outer court, and i palm trees were on its jambs, and n its stairway
had eight steps.
32Then he brought me to the inner court on the east side, and o he
measured the gate. It was of the same size as the others. 33Its side rooms, its
jambs, and its vestibule were of the same size as the others, and both it and
its vestibule had windows all around. Its length was fifty cubits, and its
breadth twenty-five cubits. 34
p Its vestibule faced the outer court, and it had
palm trees on its jambs, on either side, and its stairway had eight steps.
35Then he brought me to q the north gate, and r he measured it. It had the
same size as the others. 36Its side rooms, its jambs, and its vestibule were of
the same size as the others, [7] and it had windows all around. Its length was
fifty cubits, and its breadth twenty-five cubits. 37Its vestibule [8] faced the
outer court, and it had palm trees on its jambs, on either side, and its
stairway had eight steps.
38There was s a chamber with its door in the vestibule of the gate, [9]
t where the burnt offering was to be washed. 39And in the vestibule of the
gate were two u tables on either side, on which the v burnt offering and the
w sin offering and the x guilt offering were to be slaughtered. 40And off to
the side, on the outside as one goes up to the entrance of the north gate,
were two tables; and off to the other side of the vestibule of the gate were
two tables. 41
y Four tables were on either side of the gate, eight tables, z on
which to slaughter.
42And there were four tables a of hewn stone for the
burnt offering, a cubit and a half long, and a cubit and a half broad, and one
cubit high, on which the instruments were to be laid with which the v burnt
offerings and the sacrifices were slaughtered. 43And hooks, [10] a
handbreadth long, were fastened all around within. And on the tables the
flesh of the offering was to be laid.
Chambers for the Priests
44On the outside of the inner gateway there were two b chambers [11] in the
c inner court, one [12] at the side of the north gate facing south, the other at
the side of the south [13] gate facing north. 45And he said to me, “This
chamber that faces south is for the priests d who have charge of the temple,
46and the chamber that faces north is for the priests e who have charge of
the altar. These are f the sons of Zadok, who alone [14] among the sons of
Levi may come g near to the LORD to minister to him.” 47And he measured
the court, h a hundred cubits long and h a hundred cubits broad, a square.
And i the altar was in front of the temple.
The Vestibule of the Temple
48Then he brought me to j the vestibule of the temple and measured the
k jambs of the vestibule, five cubits on either side. And the breadth of the
gate was fourteen cubits, and the sidewalls of the gate [15] were three cubits
on either side. 49
l The length of the vestibule was twenty cubits, and the
breadth twelve [16] cubits, and people would go up to it by ten steps. [17] And
there were pillars beside the jambs, one on either side.
The Inner Temple