EZEKIEL 34 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] d “Son of man,
prophesy against the shepherds of Israel; prophesy, and say to them, even to
the shepherds, Thus says the Lord GOD: e Ah, shepherds of Israel f who
have been feeding yourselves! g Should not shepherds feed the sheep?
3
h You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, i you slaughter the
fat ones, but you do not feed the sheep. 4 j The weak you have not
strengthened, the sick you have not healed, h the injured you have not
bound up, h the strayed you have not brought back, k the lost you have not
sought, and with force and l harshness you have ruled them. 5 m So they
were scattered, because there was no shepherd, and n they became food for
all the wild beasts. 6My sheep were scattered; they wandered over all the
mountains and on every high hill. My sheep were scattered over all the face
of the earth, o with none to search or seek for them.
7“Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD: 8 p As I live,
declares the Lord GOD, surely because q my sheep have become a prey, and
my sheep have become food for all the wild beasts, since there was no
shepherd, and because my shepherds have not searched for my sheep, but
the shepherds have fed themselves, and have not fed my sheep, 9therefore,
you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD: 10Thus says the Lord GOD,
r Behold, I am against the shepherds, and s I will require my sheep at their
hand and t put a stop to their feeding the sheep. u No longer shall the
shepherds feed themselves. v I will rescue my sheep from their mouths, that
they may not be food for them.
The Lord GOD Will Seek Them Out
11[†]“For thus says the Lord GOD: w Behold, I, I x myself will search for my
sheep and will seek them out. 12As a shepherd seeks out his flock when he
is among his sheep that have been scattered, so will I seek out my sheep,
and I will rescue them from all places where they have been scattered on y a
day of clouds and z thick darkness. 13And I will bring them out from the
peoples a and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into their
own land. And I will feed them on b the mountains of Israel, by the ravines,
and in all the inhabited places of the country.
14 c I will feed them with good
pasture, and on the mountain heights of Israel shall be their grazing land.
d There they shall lie down in good grazing land, and on rich pasture they
shall feed on the mountains of Israel. 15
e I myself will be the shepherd of
my sheep, d and I myself will make them lie down, declares the Lord GOD.
16 f I will seek the lost, g and I will bring back the strayed, and I will bind up
the injured, and I will strengthen the weak, and h the fat and the strong I
will destroy. [1] I will feed them in justice.
17[†]“As for you, my flock, thus says the Lord GOD: i Behold, I judge
between sheep and sheep, between rams and j male goats. 18Is it not enough
for you to feed on the good pasture, that you must tread down with your
feet the rest of your pasture; and to drink of k clear water, that you must
muddy the rest of the water with your feet? 19And must my sheep eat what
you have trodden with your feet, and drink what you have muddied with
your feet?
20“Therefore, thus says the Lord GOD to them: Behold, I, I myself will
judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep. 21Because you push with
side and shoulder, and l thrust at all the m weak with your horns, till you
have scattered them abroad, 22I will rescue [2] my flock; n they shall no
longer be a prey. And I will judge between sheep and sheep. 23[†]And o I
will set up over them one shepherd, p my servant David, and he shall feed
them: he shall feed them and be their shepherd. 24And q I, the LORD, will be
their God, and my servant David shall be prince among them. r I am the
LORD; I have spoken.
The LORD’s Covenant of Peace
25[†] s “I will make with them a covenant of peace and t banish wild beasts
from the land, u so that they may dwell securely in the wilderness and sleep
in the woods. 26And I will make them and the places all around my hill v a
blessing, and w I will send down the showers in their season; they shall be
x showers of blessing. 27 y And the trees of the field shall yield their fruit,
and the earth shall yield its increase, u and they shall be secure in their land.
And z they shall know that I am the LORD, when a I break the bars of their
yoke, and a deliver them from the hand of those who enslaved them.
28
n They shall no more be a prey to the nations, t nor shall the beasts of the
land devour them. u They shall dwell securely, and none shall make them
afraid. 29And I will provide for them b renowned plantations so that c they
shall no more be consumed with hunger in the land, and no longer d suffer
the reproach of the nations. 30And they shall know that q I am the LORD
their God with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my people,
declares the Lord GOD.
31And you are my sheep, e human sheep of my
pasture, and I am your God, declares the Lord GOD.”
Prophecy Against Mount Seir