EZEKIEL 24 [†] l In the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of
the month, the word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] m “Son of man, write
down the name of this day, this very day. The king of Babylon has laid
siege to Jerusalem this very day.
3And n utter a parable to o the rebellious
house and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD:
“Set on p the pot, set it on;
pour in water also;
4 put in it the pieces of meat,
all the good pieces, q the thigh and the shoulder;
fill it with choice bones.
5 Take the choicest one of the flock;
pile the logs [1] under it;
boil it well;
seethe also its bones in it.
6“Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: r Woe to the bloody city, to p the pot
whose corrosion is in it, and whose corrosion has not gone out of it! Take
out of it piece after piece, without making any choice. [2] 7For the blood she
has shed is in her midst; she put it on s the bare rock; t she did not pour it
out on the ground to cover it with dust. 8To rouse my wrath, to take
vengeance, I have set on the bare rock the blood she has shed, that it may
not be covered. 9Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Woe to the bloody city!
u I also will make the pile great. 10[†]Heap on the logs, kindle the fire, boil
the meat well, mix in the spices, [3] and let the bones be burned up. 11Then
set it empty upon the coals, that it may become hot, and its copper may
burn, v that its uncleanness may be melted in it, its corrosion consumed.
12 w She has wearied herself with toil; [4] its abundant corrosion does not go
out of it. Into the fire with its corrosion! 13On account of your unclean
lewdness, because I would have cleansed you and you were not cleansed
from your uncleanness, x you shall not be cleansed anymore till y I have
satisfied my fury upon you. 14
z I am the LORD. I have spoken; it shall come
to pass; I will do it. I will not go back; a I will not spare; b I will not relent;
c according to your ways and your deeds you will be judged, declares the
Lord GOD.”
Ezekiel’s Wife Dies
15[†]The word of the LORD came to me: 16 d “Son of man, behold, I am
about to take the delight of your eyes away from you at a stroke; yet you
shall not mourn or weep, nor shall your tears run down. 17Sigh, but not
aloud; make no mourning for the dead. e Bind on your turban, and f put
your shoes on your feet; do not cover your lips, g nor eat the bread of men.”
18So I spoke to the people in the morning, and h at evening my wife died.
And on the next morning I did i as I was commanded.
19[†]And j the people said to me, “Will you not tell us what these things
mean for us, that you are acting thus?” 20Then I said to them, “The word of
the LORD came to me: 21‘Say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord
GOD: k Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the pride of your power, the
delight of your eyes, and the yearning of your soul, and l your sons and
your daughters whom you left behind shall fall by the sword. 22And m you
shall do as I have done; m you shall not cover your lips, g nor eat the bread
of men. 23 m Your turbans shall be on your heads and your shoes on your
feet; you shall not mourn or weep, but n you shall rot away in your
iniquities and groan to one another.
24Thus shall Ezekiel be to you o a sign;
m according to all that he has done you shall do. When this comes, then
p you will know that I am the Lord GOD.’
25[†]“As for you, q son of man, surely on the day when I take from them
r their stronghold, their joy and glory, the delight of their eyes and their
soul’s desire, and also their sons and daughters, 26
s on that day a fugitive
will come to you to report to you the news. 27On that day your mouth t will
be opened to the fugitive, and you shall speak and be no longer mute. u So
you will be a sign to them, and v they will know that I am the LORD.”
Prophecy Against Ammon