EZEKIEL 32 [†] e In the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, on the first day of
the month, the word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] f “Son of man, g raise a
lamentation over h Pharaoh king of Egypt and say to him:
“You consider yourself i a lion of the nations,
but you are like j a dragon k in the seas;
l you burst forth in your rivers,
trouble the waters with your feet,
and foul their rivers.
3 Thus says the Lord GOD:
m I will throw my net over you
with a host of n many peoples,
and o they will haul you up in my dragnet.
4 And p I will cast you on the ground;
on the open field I will fling you,
and will cause all the birds of the heavens to settle on you,
and I will gorge the beasts of the whole earth with you.
5 I will strew your flesh q upon the mountains
and fill the valleys with your carcass. [1]
6 I will drench the land even to the mountains
with your flowing blood,
and the ravines will be full of you.
7[†] r When I blot you out, s I will cover the heavens
and make their stars dark;
I will cover the sun with a cloud,
and the moon shall not give its light.
8 All the bright lights of heaven
will I make dark over you,
and t put darkness on your land,
declares the Lord GOD.
9“I will trouble the hearts of many peoples, when I bring your destruction
among the nations, into the countries that you have not known. 10
u I will
make many peoples appalled at you, and the hair of their kings shall bristle
with horror because of you, when v I brandish my sword before them.
w They shall tremble every moment, every one for his own life, on the day
of your downfall.
11“For thus says the Lord GOD: x The sword of the king of Babylon shall
come upon you. 12I will cause y your multitude to fall by the swords of
mighty ones, all of them z most ruthless of nations.
a “They shall bring to ruin the pride of Egypt,
and all its multitude [2] shall perish.
13 I will destroy all its beasts
from beside many waters;
b and no foot of man shall trouble them anymore,
nor shall the hoofs of beasts trouble them.
14[†] Then c I will make their waters clear,
and cause their rivers to run like oil,
declares the Lord GOD.
15 When I make the land of Egypt desolate,
and when the land d is desolate of all that fills it,
when I strike down all who dwell in it,
then e they will know that I am the LORD.
16 f This is a lamentation that shall be chanted; the daughters of the nations
shall chant it; over Egypt, and over g all her multitude, shall they chant it,
declares the Lord GOD.”
17[†] h In the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, [3] on the fifteenth day of
the month, the word of the LORD came to me: 18
i “Son of man, j wail over
g the multitude of Egypt, and k send them down, her and the daughters of
majestic nations, l to the world below, to those who have gone down to the
pit:
19[†] m ‘Whom do you surpass in beauty?
Go down and n be laid to rest with the uncircumcised.’
20They shall fall amid those o who are slain by the sword. Egypt [4] is
delivered to the sword; drag her away, and p all her multitudes. 21The
mighty chiefs q shall speak of them, r with their helpers, out of the midst of
Sheol: ‘They have come down, they lie still, s the uncircumcised, o slain by
the sword.’
22[†] t “Assyria is there, and all her company, u its graves all around it, all
of them slain, fallen by the sword, 23whose graves are set in v the uttermost
parts of the pit; and her company is all around her grave, all of them slain,
fallen by the sword, w who spread terror x in the land of the living.
24
y “Elam is z there, and all her multitude around her grave; all of them
a slain, fallen by the sword, who went down uncircumcised into b the world
below, who spread their terror in the land of the living; and c they bear their
shame b with those who go down to the pit. 25
d They have made her a bed
among the slain with all her multitude, e her graves all around it, all of them
uncircumcised, slain by the sword; for terror of them was spread in the land
of the living, and they bear their shame with those who go down to the pit;
they are placed among the slain.
26 f “Meshech-Tubal is e there, and all her multitude, e her graves all
around it, all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword; for they spread
their terror in the land of the living. 27And g they do not lie with the mighty,
the fallen from among the uncircumcised, who went down to Sheol with
their weapons of war, whose swords were laid under their heads, and whose
iniquities are upon their bones; for the terror of the mighty men was in the
land of the living. 28But as for you, you shall be broken h and lie among the
uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword.
29 i “Edom is j there, her kings and all her princes, who for all their might
are laid with those who are killed by the sword; they lie with the
uncircumcised, with those who go down to the pit.
30“The princes k of the north are there, all of them, and all the
l Sidonians, who have gone down in shame with the slain, m for all the
terror that they caused by their might; they lie uncircumcised with those
who are slain by the sword, and n bear their shame with those who go down
to the pit.
31“When Pharaoh sees them, he o will be comforted for p all his
multitude, Pharaoh and all his army, slain by the sword, declares the Lord
GOD.
32 q For I spread terror r in the land of the living; and he shall be laid to
rest among s the uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword,
Pharaoh and all his multitude, declares the Lord GOD.”
Ezekiel Is Israel’s Watchman