EZEKIEL 41 [†]Then he brought me to m the nave and measured the
n jambs. On each side six cubits [1] was the breadth of the jambs. [2] 2And
the breadth of the entrance was ten cubits, and the sidewalls of the entrance
were five cubits on either side. And he measured the length of the nave, [3]
o forty cubits, and its breadth, p twenty cubits. 3Then he went q into the
inner room and measured the jambs of the entrance, two cubits; and the
entrance, six cubits; and the sidewalls on either side [4] of the entrance,
seven cubits. 4And he measured r the length of the room, twenty cubits, and
its breadth, twenty cubits, across s the nave. And he said to me, “This is
t the Most Holy Place.”
5Then he measured the wall of the temple, six cubits thick, and the
breadth of u the side chambers, four cubits, u all around the temple. 6And
the side chambers were in three stories, one over another, v thirty in each
story. There were offsets [5] all around the wall of the temple to serve as
supports for the side chambers, w so that they should not be supported by
the wall of the temple. 7And it became broader as it wound upward to the
side chambers, because the temple was enclosed upward all around the
temple. Thus the temple had a broad area upward, and x so one went up
from the lowest story to the top story through the middle story.
8I saw also
that the temple had a raised platform all around; the foundations of the side
chambers measured a full reed of y six long cubits. 9The thickness of the
outer wall of the side chambers was five cubits. z The free space between
the side chambers of the temple and the 10
a other chambers was a breadth of
b twenty cubits all around the temple on every side. 11And the doors of the
c side chambers opened on d the free space, one door toward the north, and
another door toward the south. And the breadth of the free space was five
cubits all around.
12The building that was facing e the separate yard on the west side was
seventy cubits broad, and the wall of the building was five cubits thick all
around, and its length ninety cubits.
13Then he measured the temple, f a hundred cubits long; and the yard and
the building with its walls, a hundred cubits long; 14also the breadth of the
east front of the temple and the yard, a hundred cubits.
15Then he measured the length of g the building facing the yard that was
at the back and h its galleries [6] on either side, a hundred cubits.
The inside of the nave and the vestibules of the court, 16 i the thresholds
and j the narrow windows and the galleries all around the three of them,
opposite the threshold, were paneled with wood all around, from the floor
up to the windows (now the windows were covered), 17to the space above
the door, even to the inner room, and on the outside. And on all the walls all
around, inside and outside, was a measured pattern. [7] 18It was carved of
k cherubim and l palm trees, a palm tree between cherub and cherub. Every
cherub had two faces: 19 m a human face toward the palm tree on the one
side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side.
They were carved on the whole temple all around. 20From the floor to
above the door, cherubim and palm trees were carved; similarly the wall of
the nave.
21The doorposts of n the nave were squared, and in front of o the Holy
Place was something resembling 22
p an altar of wood, three cubits high, two
cubits long, and two cubits broad. [8] Its corners, its base, [9] and its walls
were of wood. He said to me, “This is q the table that is before the LORD.”
23The nave and the Holy Place had each r a double door.
24The double
doors had two leaves apiece, s two swinging leaves for each door.
25And on
the doors of the nave were carved cherubim and palm trees, t such as were
carved on the walls. And there was u a canopy [10] of wood in front of v the
vestibule outside. 26And there were j narrow windows and palm trees on
either side, on the sidewalls of the vestibule, w the side chambers of the
temple, and the u canopies.
The Temple’s Chambers