EZEKIEL 9 [†]Then he cried in my ears with a loud voice, saying, “Bring
near the executioners of the city, z each with his destroying weapon in his
hand.” 2And behold, six men came from the direction of a the upper gate,
which faces north, each with his weapon for slaughter in his hand, and with
them was b a man clothed in linen, with a writing case at his waist. And
they went in and stood beside c the bronze altar.
3[†]Now d the glory of the God of Israel had gone up from the cherub on
which it rested to e the threshold of the house. And he called to b the man
clothed in linen, who had the writing case at his waist. 4And the LORD said
to him, “Pass through the city, through Jerusalem, and f put a mark on the
foreheads of the men who g sigh and groan over all the abominations that
are committed in it.” 5And to h the others he said in my hearing, “Pass
through the city after him, and strike. i Your eye shall not spare, and you
shall show no pity.
6[†] j Kill old men outright, young men and maidens,
little children and women, but k touch no one on whom is the mark. And
l begin at my sanctuary.” So they began with the elders who were before the
house. 7Then he said to them, m “Defile the house, and fill the courts with
the slain. Go out.” So they went out and struck in the city.
8[†]And while
they were striking, and I was left alone, n I fell upon my face, and cried,
o “Ah, Lord GOD! p Will you destroy all the remnant of Israel q in the
outpouring of your wrath on Jerusalem?”
9[†]Then he said to me, r “The guilt of the house of Israel and Judah is
exceedingly great. s The land is full of blood, and the city full of injustice.
For t they say, ‘The LORD has forsaken the land, and the LORD does not see.’
10As for me, u my eye will not spare, nor will I have pity; v I will bring their
deeds upon their heads.”
11And behold, w the man clothed in linen, with the writing case at his
waist, brought back word, saying, “I have done as you commanded me.”
The Glory of the LORD Leaves the Temple