EZEKIEL 23 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2 h “Son of man, there
were i two women, the daughters of one mother.
3 j They played the whore
in Egypt; j they played the whore k in their youth; there their breasts were
pressed and their virgin bosoms [1] handled. 4[†]Oholah was the name of the
elder and Oholibah the name of her sister. l They became mine, and they
m bore sons and daughters. As for their names, Oholah is n Samaria, and
Oholibah is Jerusalem.
5“Oholah played the whore o while she was mine, and p she lusted after
her lovers q the Assyrians, warriors 6clothed in purple, r governors and
commanders, s all of them desirable young men, t horsemen riding on
horses. 7She bestowed her whoring upon them, the choicest men of Assyria
all of them, and she defiled herself with all the idols of everyone after
whom she lusted. 8She did not give up her whoring u that she had begun in
Egypt; for in her youth men had lain with her and handled her virgin bosom
and poured out their whoring lust upon her.
9Therefore v I delivered her into
the hands of her lovers, into the hands of the Assyrians, after whom she
lusted. 10 w These uncovered her nakedness; x they seized her sons and her
daughters; and as for her, they killed her with the sword; and she became y a
byword among women, z when judgment had been executed on her.
11[†] a “Her sister Oholibah saw this, and she became b more corrupt than
her sister [2] in her lust and in her whoring, which was worse than that of her
sister.
12[†]She lusted after the Assyrians, governors and commanders,
warriors clothed in full armor, horsemen riding on horses, s all of them
desirable young men. 13And I saw that she was defiled; they both took the
same way.
14[†]But she carried her whoring further. She saw men
c portrayed on the wall, the d images of e the Chaldeans portrayed in
vermilion, 15wearing belts on their waists, with flowing turbans on their
heads, all of them having the appearance of officers, a likeness of
Babylonians whose native land was Chaldea. 16When she saw them, she
lusted after them and f sent messengers to them e in Chaldea. 17And the
Babylonians came to her g into the bed of love, and they defiled her with
their whoring lust. And after she was defiled by them, h she turned from
them in disgust. 18When she carried on her whoring so openly and flaunted
her nakedness, I turned in disgust from her, as I had turned in disgust from
her sister.
19[†]Yet she increased her whoring, i remembering the days of
her youth, when she played the whore in the land of Egypt 20and lusted
after her lovers there, whose members were like those of donkeys, and
whose issue was like that of horses. 21Thus you longed for the lewdness of
your youth, when the Egyptians handled your bosom and pressed [3] your
young breasts.”
22[†]Therefore, O Oholibah, thus says the Lord GOD: “Behold, I will stir
up against you your lovers h from whom you turned in disgust, j and I will
bring them against you from every side: 23the Babylonians and all the
Chaldeans, k Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them,
l desirable young men, l governors and commanders all of them, officers
and men of renown, all of them riding on horses. 24And they shall come
against you from the north [4] with chariots and wagons and a host of
peoples. m They shall set themselves against you on every side with
buckler, shield, and helmet; and n I will commit the judgment to them, and
o they shall judge you according to their judgments. 25And I will direct my
jealousy against you, p that they may deal with you in fury. They shall cut
off your nose and your ears, and your survivors shall fall by the sword.
q They shall seize your sons and your daughters, and your survivors shall be
devoured by fire. 26 r They shall also strip you of your clothes and take away
your beautiful jewels. 27
s Thus I will put an end to your lewdness and t your
whoring begun in the land of Egypt, so that you shall not lift up your eyes
to them or remember Egypt anymore.
28“For thus says the Lord GOD: u Behold, I will deliver you into the
hands of those whom you hate, v into the hands of those from whom you
turned in disgust, 29and w they shall deal with you in hatred and take away
all the fruit of your labor x and leave you naked and bare, and y the
nakedness of your whoring shall be uncovered. Your lewdness and your
whoring 30have brought this upon you, because z you played the whore with
the nations and defiled yourself with their idols. 31You have gone the way
of your sister; a therefore I will give b her cup into your hand. 32[†]Thus
says the Lord GOD:
“You shall drink your sister’s cup
that is deep and large;
you shall be laughed at and held in derision,
for it contains much;
33 you will be filled with c drunkenness and sorrow.
c A cup of horror and desolation,
the cup of d your sister Samaria;
34
e you shall drink it and drain it out,
and gnaw its shards,
and tear your breasts;
for I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.
35Therefore thus says the Lord
GOD: Because f you have forgotten me and g cast me behind your back, you
yourself h must bear the consequences of your lewdness and whoring.”
36[†]The LORD said to me: i “Son of man, j will you judge Oholah and
Oholibah? Declare to them their abominations. 37For k they have committed
adultery, l and blood is on their hands. With their idols they have committed
adultery, and they have even m offered up [5] to them for food the children
whom they had borne to me. 38Moreover, this they have done to me: n they
have defiled my sanctuary on the same day and o profaned my Sabbaths.
39For when p they had slaughtered their children in sacrifice to their idols,
on the same day q they came into my sanctuary to profane it. And behold,
r this is what they did in my house. 40They even sent for men to come from
afar, s to whom a messenger was sent; and behold, they came. For them you
bathed yourself, t painted your eyes, u and adorned yourself with
ornaments. 41You sat on v a stately couch, with a table spread before it w on
which you had placed my incense and x my oil. 42The y sound of a carefree
multitude was with her; and with men of the common sort, drunkards [6]
were brought from the wilderness; and they put z bracelets on the hands of
the women, and a beautiful crowns on their heads.
43“Then I said of her who was worn out by adultery, Now they will
continue to use her for a whore, even her! [7] 44For they have gone in to her,
as men go in to a prostitute. Thus they went in to Oholah and to Oholibah,
lewd women! 45But righteous men b shall pass judgment on them with the
sentence of adulteresses, and with the sentence of women who shed blood,
because they are adulteresses, and blood is on their hands.”
46For thus says the Lord GOD: c “Bring up a vast host against them, and
make them d an object of terror and e a plunder.
47 f And the host shall stone
them and cut them down with their swords. g They shall kill their sons and
their daughters, and h burn up their houses. 48 i Thus will I put an end to
lewdness in the land, that all women may take warning and not commit
lewdness as you have done. 49And they shall return your lewdness upon
you, and j you shall bear the penalty for your sinful idolatry, and k you shall
know that I am the Lord GOD.”
The Siege of Jerusalem