EZEKIEL 1 [†] a In the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, on the fifth day of
the month, as I was among the exiles by b the Chebar canal, c the heavens
were opened, and I saw d visions of God. [1] 2[†]On the fifth day of the
month (it was e the fifth year of f the exile of King Jehoiachin), 3the word of
the LORD came to Ezekiel g the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the
Chaldeans by b the Chebar canal, and h the hand of the LORD was upon him
there.
The Glory of the LORD
4[†]As I looked, behold, i a stormy wind came j out of the north, and a great
cloud, with k brightness around it, and fire flashing forth continually, and in
the midst of the fire, l as it were gleaming metal. [2] 5And from the midst of
it came the likeness of m four living creatures. n And this was their
appearance: they had a human likeness, 6 o but each had four faces, and each
of them had four wings. 7Their legs were straight, and the soles of their feet
were like the sole of a calf’s foot. And they sparkled p like burnished
bronze. 8Under their wings q on their four sides r they had human hands.
And the four had their faces and their wings thus: 9[†]their wings touched
one another. s Each one of them went straight forward, q without turning as
they went. 10[†]As for the likeness of their faces, t each had a human face.
The four had the face of a lion on the right side, the four had the face of an
ox on the left side, and the four had the face of an eagle. 11Such were their
faces. And their wings were spread out above. Each creature had two wings,
each of which touched the wing of another, while u two covered their
bodies. 12[†] s And each went straight forward. v Wherever the spirit [3]
would go, they went, without turning as they went. 13As for the likeness of
the living creatures, their appearance was w like burning coals of fire, w like
the appearance of torches moving to and fro among the living creatures.
x And the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning. 14And the
living creatures y darted to and fro, z like the appearance of a flash of
lightning.
15 a Now as I looked at the living creatures, I saw a wheel on the earth
beside the living creatures, one for each of the four of them. [4] 16
a As for
the appearance of the wheels and their construction: their appearance was
like b the gleaming of beryl. c And the four had the same likeness, their
appearance and construction being as it were a wheel within a wheel.
17 d When they went, they went e in any of their four directions [5] f without
turning as they went. 18And their rims were tall and awesome, g and the
rims of all four were full of eyes all around. 19 h And when the living
creatures went, the wheels went beside them; i and when the living
creatures rose from the earth, the wheels rose. 20
j Wherever the spirit
wanted to go, they went, and the wheels rose along with them, j for the
spirit of the living creatures [6] was in the wheels. 21 h When those went,
these went; and when those stood, these stood; i and when those rose from
the earth, the wheels rose along with them, j for the spirit of the living
creatures was in the wheels.
22[†]Over the heads of the living creatures there was k the likeness of an
expanse, shining like awe-inspiring l crystal, spread out above their heads.
23And under the expanse their wings were m stretched out straight, one
toward another. n And each creature had two wings covering its body.
24And when they went, I heard the sound of their wings o like the sound of
many waters, like p the sound of the q Almighty, a sound of tumult r like the
sound of an army. When they stood still, they let down their wings. 25And
there came a voice from above s the expanse over their heads. When they
stood still, they let down their wings.
26And above the expanse over their heads there was t the likeness of a
throne, t in appearance u like sapphire; [7] and seated above the likeness of a
throne was v a likeness with a human appearance. 27And w upward from
what had the appearance of his waist I saw as it were x gleaming metal, like
the appearance of fire enclosed all around. And downward from what had
the appearance of his waist I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and
y there was brightness around him. [8] 28[†]Like the appearance of z the bow
that is in the cloud on the day of rain, so was the appearance of the
brightness all around.
Such was the appearance of the likeness of a the glory of the LORD. And
when I saw it, b I fell on my face, and I heard the voice of one speaking.
Ezekiel’s Call