EZEKIEL 12 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] j “Son of man, you
dwell in the midst of k a rebellious house, l who have eyes to see, but see
not, who have ears to hear, but hear not, for they are k a rebellious house.
3[†]As for you, son of man, prepare for yourself m an exile’s baggage, and
go into exile by day n in their sight. You shall go like an exile from your
place to another place n in their sight. o Perhaps they will understand,
though [1] they are a rebellious house. 4You shall bring out your baggage by
day in their sight, as baggage for exile, and you shall go out yourself p at
evening in their sight, as those do who must go into exile. 5In their sight
q dig through the wall, and bring your baggage out through it. 6In their sight
you shall lift the baggage upon your shoulder and carry it out at dusk. You
shall cover your face that you may not see the land, for I have made you r a
sign for the house of Israel.”
7 s And I did as I was commanded. t I brought out my baggage by day, as
baggage for exile, and in the evening I dug through the wall with my own
hands. I brought out my baggage at dusk, carrying it on my shoulder in their
sight.
8[†]In the morning the word of the LORD came to me: 9 u “Son of man,
has not the house of Israel, v the rebellious house, said to you, w ‘What are
you doing?’ 10Say to them, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD: This oracle
concerns [2] x the prince in Jerusalem and all the house of Israel who are in
it.’ [3] 11Say, y ‘I am a sign for you: z as I have done, so shall it be done to
them. They shall go into exile, into captivity.’ 12 a And the prince who is
among them shall lift his baggage upon his shoulder at dusk, and shall go
out. b They shall dig through the wall to bring him out through it. c He shall
cover his face, that he may not see the land with his eyes. 13[†] d And I will
spread my net over him, and he shall be taken in my snare. And e I will
bring him to Babylon, the land of the Chaldeans, e yet he shall not see it,
and he shall die there. 14
f And I will scatter toward every wind all who are
around him, his helpers and all his troops, g and I will unsheathe the sword
after them. 15 h And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I disperse
them among the nations and scatter them among the countries. 16
i But I will
let a few of them escape from the sword, from famine and pestilence, that
they may declare all their abominations among the nations where they go,
j and may know that I am the LORD.”
17And the word of the LORD came to me: 18 k “Son of man, l eat your
bread with quaking, and drink water with trembling and with anxiety.
19And
say to the people of the land, Thus says the Lord GOD concerning the
inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel: m They shall eat their bread
with anxiety, m and drink water in dismay. In this way n her land will be
stripped of all it contains, o on account of the violence of all those who
dwell in it. 20 p And the inhabited cities shall be laid waste, and the land
shall become a desolation; and you shall know that I am the LORD.”
21[†]And the word of the LORD came to me: 22“Son of man, q what is this
proverb that you [4] have about the land of Israel, saying, r ‘The days grow
long, and every vision comes to nothing’? 23Tell them therefore, ‘Thus says
the Lord GOD: I will put an end to this proverb, and they shall no more use
it as a proverb in Israel.’ But say to them, s The days are near, and the
fulfillment [5] of every vision. 24 t For there shall be no more any u false
vision or flattering divination within the house of Israel. 25For I am the
LORD; I will speak v the word that I will speak, and it will be performed. w It
will no longer be delayed, but in your days, x O rebellious house, I will
speak the word and perform it, declares the Lord GOD.”
26And the word of the LORD came to me: 27“Son of man, behold, they of
the house of Israel say, y ‘The vision that he sees is z for many days from
now, and he prophesies of times far off.’ 28Therefore say to them, Thus says
the Lord GOD: w None of my words will be delayed any longer, v but the
word that I speak will be performed, declares the Lord GOD.”
False Prophets Condemned