EZEKIEL 37 [†] d The hand of the LORD was upon me, and e he brought me
out in the Spirit of the LORD and set me down in the middle of the valley; [1]
it was full of bones. 2And he led me around among them, and behold, there
were very many on the surface of the valley, and behold, they were very
dry.
3[†]And he said to me, f “Son of man, g can these bones live?” And h I
answered, “O Lord GOD, you know.” 4[†]Then he said to me, i “Prophesy
over these bones, and say to them, j O dry bones, hear the word of the
LORD.
5Thus says the Lord GOD to these bones: Behold, I will cause
k breath [2] to enter you, and you shall live. 6
l And I will lay sinews upon
you, and will cause flesh to come upon you, and l cover you with skin, and
put breath in you, and you shall live, m and you shall know that I am the
LORD.”
7So I prophesied n as I was commanded. And as I prophesied, there was a
sound, and behold, o a rattling, [3] and the bones came together, bone to its
bone. 8And I looked, and behold, there were sinews on them, and flesh had
come upon them, and skin had covered them. But p there was no breath in
them. 9[†]Then he said to me, i “Prophesy to the breath; prophesy, f son of
man, and say to the breath, Thus says the Lord GOD: Come from q the four
winds, O breath, and breathe on these slain, that they may live.” 10So I
prophesied n as he commanded me, and r the breath came into them, and
they lived and stood on their feet, an exceedingly great army.
11Then he said to me, f “Son of man, these bones are the whole house of
Israel. Behold, they say, ‘Our bones are dried up, and s our hope is lost; t we
are indeed cut off.’ 12[†]Therefore i prophesy, and say to them, Thus says
the Lord GOD: Behold, u I will open your graves and raise you from your
graves, O my people. And v I will bring you into the land of Israel. 13And
w you shall know that I am the LORD, when I open your graves, and raise
you from your graves, O my people. 14[†]And x I will put my Spirit within
you, and you shall live, and I will place you in your own land. Then you
shall know that I am the LORD; y I have spoken, and I will do it, declares the
LORD.”
I Will Be Their God, They Shall Be My People
15[†]The word of the LORD came to me: 16[†] z “Son of man, a take a stick [4]
and write on it, ‘For b Judah, and c the people of Israel associated with
him’; then take another stick and write on it, ‘For b Joseph (the stick of
d Ephraim) and all the house of Israel associated with him.’ 17And e join
them one to another into one stick, that f they may become g one in your
hand. 18And when h your people say to you, i ‘Will you not tell us what you
mean by these?’ 19[†]say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I am
about to take j the stick of Joseph (that is in the hand of Ephraim) and the
tribes of Israel associated with him. And I will join with it the j stick of
Judah, [5] and k make them one stick, g that they may be one in my hand.
20When the sticks on which you write are in your hand l before their eyes,
21[†]then say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, m I will take the
people of Israel from the nations among which they have gone, and will
gather them from all around, and m bring them to their own land. 22And n I
will make them one nation in the land, on o the mountains of Israel. And
p one king shall be king over them all, and they shall be no longer q two
nations, and no longer divided into two kingdoms. 23 r They shall not
s defile themselves anymore t with their idols and their detestable things, or
with any of their transgressions. But u I will save them from all the
backslidings [6] in which they have sinned, and will cleanse them; and v they
shall be my people, and I will be their God.
24[†]“My servant w David x shall be king over them, and they shall all
have y one shepherd. z They shall walk in my rules and be careful to obey
my statutes. 25
a They shall dwell in the land that I gave to my servant Jacob,
where your fathers lived. They and their children and their children’s
children shall dwell there b forever, and David my servant shall be their
prince c forever.
26[†] d I will make a covenant of peace with them. It shall
be e an everlasting covenant with them. And I will set them in their land [7]
and f multiply them, and will g set my sanctuary in their midst forevermore.
27[†] h My dwelling place shall be with them, v and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people. 28Then i the nations will know that j I am the LORD
who sanctifies Israel, when g my sanctuary is in their midst forevermore.”
Prophecy Against Gog