EZEKIEL 46 [†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: p The gate of q the inner court
that faces east shall be shut on the six working days, but on the Sabbath day
it shall be opened, and r on the day of the new moon it shall be opened.
2
s The prince shall enter by the vestibule of the gate from outside, and shall
take his stand by t the post of the gate. u The priests shall offer his burnt
offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at v the threshold of
the gate. Then he shall go out, but the gate shall not be shut until evening.
3
w The people of the land shall bow down at the entrance of that gate before
the LORD on the Sabbaths and on the new moons. 4 x The burnt offering that
the prince offers to the LORD y on the Sabbath day shall be six lambs
without blemish and a ram without blemish. 5And z the grain offering with
the ram shall be an ephah, [1] and the grain offering with the lambs shall be
a as much as he is able, together with a hin [2] of oil to each ephah. 6On the
day of the new moon he shall offer a bull from the herd without blemish,
and six lambs and a ram, which shall be without blemish. 7As a grain
offering he shall provide an ephah with the bull and an ephah with the ram,
and with the lambs b as much as he is able, together with a hin of oil to each
ephah. 8[†] c When the prince enters, he shall enter by the vestibule of the
gate, and he shall go out by the same way.
9
d “When the people of the land e come before the LORD at the appointed
feasts, he who enters by the north gate to worship shall go out by the south
gate, and he who enters by the south gate shall go out by the north gate: no
one shall return by way of the gate by which he entered, but each shall go
out straight ahead. 10When they enter, f the prince shall enter with them, and
when they go out, he shall go out.
11“At the feasts and the appointed festivals, z the grain offering with a
young bull shall be an ephah, and with a ram an ephah, and with the lambs
b as much as one is able to give, together with a hin of oil to an ephah.
12When the prince provides g a freewill offering, either a burnt offering or
peace offerings as a freewill offering to the LORD, h the gate facing east
shall be opened for him. And he shall offer his burnt offering or his peace
offerings i as he does on the Sabbath day. Then he shall go out, and after he
has gone out the gate shall be shut.
13 j “You shall provide a lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt
offering to the LORD daily; morning by morning you shall provide it. 14And
k you shall provide a grain offering with it morning by morning, one sixth
of an ephah, and one third of a hin of oil to moisten the flour, as a grain
offering to the LORD. This is a perpetual statute. 15Thus the lamb and the
meal offering and the oil shall be provided, morning by morning, for l a
regular burnt offering.
16[†]“Thus says the Lord GOD: If the prince makes a gift to any of his
sons as his inheritance, it shall belong to his sons. It is their property by
inheritance. 17But if he makes a gift m out of his inheritance to one of his
servants, it shall be his to n the year of liberty. Then it shall revert to the
prince; surely it is his inheritance—it shall belong to his sons. 18 o The
prince shall not take any of the inheritance of the people, p thrusting them
out of their property. He shall give his sons their inheritance out of his own
property, so that none of my people shall be q scattered from his property.”
Boiling Places for Offerings
19Then he brought me through the entrance, which was r at the side of the
gate, to the north row of s the holy chambers for the priests, and behold, a
place was there at the extreme western end of them. 20And he said to me,
“This is the place where the priests t shall boil the guilt offering and the sin
offering, and where u they shall bake the grain offering, in order not to
bring them out into the outer court and so v transmit holiness to the people.”
21Then he brought me out to the outer court and led me around to the
four corners of the court. And behold, in each corner of the court there was
another court— 22in the four corners of the court were small [3] courts, forty
cubits [4] long and thirty broad; the four were of the same size. 23On the
inside, around each of the four courts was a row of masonry, with hearths
made at the bottom of the rows all around. 24Then he said to me, “These are
the kitchens where those who w minister at the temple t shall boil the
sacrifices of the people.”
Water Flowing from the Temple