EZEKIEL 18 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2“What do you [1] mean
s by repeating this proverb concerning the land of Israel, t ‘The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge’? 3 u As I live,
declares the Lord GOD, v this proverb shall no more be used by you in
Israel. 4Behold, all souls are mine; the soul of the father as well as the soul
of the son is mine: w the soul who sins shall die.
5[†]“If a man is righteous and does x what is just and right— 6if he y does
not eat upon the mountains or z lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of
Israel, a does not defile his neighbor’s wife b or approach c a woman in her
time of menstrual impurity,
7 d does not oppress anyone, but e restores to the
debtor his pledge, f commits no robbery, g gives his bread to the hungry
g and covers the naked with a garment, 8
h does not lend at interest h or take
any profit, [2] withholds his hand from injustice, i executes true justice
between man and man, 9 j walks in my statutes, and keeps my rules by
acting faithfully—he is righteous; k he shall surely live, declares the Lord
GOD.
10“If he fathers a son who is violent, l a shedder of blood, who does any
of these things 11(though he himself did none of these things), m who even
eats upon the mountains, n defiles his neighbor’s wife, 12oppresses the poor
and needy, o commits robbery, o does not restore the pledge, p lifts up his
eyes to the idols, q commits abomination, 13 r lends at interest, and takes
profit; shall he then live? He shall not live. He has done all these
abominations; he shall surely die; s his blood shall be upon himself.
14“Now suppose this man fathers a son who sees all the sins that his
father has done; he sees, and does not do likewise: 15he does not eat upon
the mountains or lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, does not
defile his neighbor’s wife, 16does not oppress anyone, t exacts no pledge,
u commits no robbery, v but gives his bread to the hungry v and covers the
naked with a garment, 17withholds his hand from iniquity, [3] takes no
interest or profit, obeys my rules, w and walks in my statutes; he shall not
die for his father’s iniquity; x he shall surely live. 18As for his father,
because he practiced extortion, robbed his brother, and did what is not good
among his people, y behold, he shall die for his iniquity.
19[†]“Yet you say, z ‘Why should not the son suffer for the iniquity of the
father?’ When the son has done a what is just and right, and has been
careful to observe all my statutes, b he shall surely live. 20[†] c The soul who
sins shall die. d The son shall not suffer for the iniquity of the father, nor the
father suffer for the iniquity of the son. e The righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon himself, f and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
himself.
21
g “But if a wicked person turns away from all his sins that he has
committed and keeps all my statutes and does h what is just and right, i he
shall surely live; he shall not die. 22 j None of the transgressions that he has
committed shall be remembered against him; for the righteousness that he
has done he shall live. 23
k Have I any pleasure in the death of the wicked,
declares the Lord GOD, and not rather that he should turn from his way and
live? 24 l But when a righteous person turns away from his righteousness and
does injustice and does the same abominations that the wicked person does,
shall he live? m None of the righteous deeds that he has done shall be
remembered; for n the treachery of which he is guilty and the sin he has
committed, for them he shall die.
25[†] o “Yet you say, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ Hear now, O house
of Israel: Is my way not just? Is it not your ways that are not just? 26 l When
a righteous person turns away from his righteousness and does injustice, he
shall die for it; for the injustice that he has done he shall die. 27Again,
p when a wicked person turns away from the wickedness he has committed
and does what is just and right, he shall save his life. 28Because he
considered and turned away from all the transgressions that he had
committed, he shall surely live; he shall not die. 29Yet the house of Israel
says, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ O house of Israel, are my ways not
just? Is it not your ways that are not just?
30[†]“Therefore q I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one
according to his ways, declares the Lord GOD. r Repent and turn from all
your transgressions, s lest iniquity be your ruin. [4] 31
t Cast away from you
all the transgressions that you have committed, and u make yourselves a
new heart and a new spirit! v Why will you die, O house of Israel? 32
w For I
have no pleasure in the death of anyone, declares the Lord GOD; r so turn,
and live.”
A Lament for the Princes of Israel