EZEKIEL 20 [†] q In the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of
the month, certain of r the elders of Israel came to inquire of the LORD,
s and sat before me. 2And the word of the LORD came to me: 3 t “Son of
man, speak to the elders of Israel, and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD,
Is it to inquire of me that you come? u As I live, declares the Lord GOD, v I
will not be inquired of by you. 4
w Will you judge them, son of man, will
you judge them? x Let them know the abominations of their fathers, 5[†]and
say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: y On the day when I chose Israel, z I
swore [1] to the offspring of the house of Jacob, a making myself known to
them in the land of Egypt; z I swore to them, saying, I am the LORD your
God. 6On that day I swore to them that b I would bring them out of the land
of Egypt into a land that I had searched out for them, a land b flowing with
milk and honey, c the most glorious of all lands. 7And I said to them, d Cast
away the detestable things e your eyes feast on, every one of you, and do
not defile yourselves with f the idols of Egypt; g I am the LORD your God.
8 h But they rebelled against me and were not willing to listen to me. i None
of them cast away the detestable things their eyes feasted on, nor did they
forsake the idols of Egypt.
“Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them j and spend my anger
against them in the midst of the land of Egypt. 9[†] k But I acted l for the
sake of my name, m that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations
among whom they lived, n in whose sight I made myself known to them in
bringing them out of the land of Egypt. 10
o So I led them out of the land of
Egypt and brought them into the wilderness. 11 p I gave them my statutes
and made known to them my rules, q by which, if a person does them, he
shall live. 12Moreover, I gave them r my Sabbaths, as a sign between me
and them, s that they might know that I am the LORD who sanctifies them.
13
t But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. u They did
not walk in my statutes but rejected my rules, by which, if a person does
them, he shall live; v and my Sabbaths they greatly profaned.
t “Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them in the wilderness, to
make a full end of them. 14But I acted for the sake of my name, that it
should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, w in whose sight I had
brought them out. 15Moreover, x I swore to them in the wilderness y that I
would not bring them into the land that I had given them, a land z flowing
with milk and honey, z the most glorious of all lands, 16because they
rejected my rules and did not walk in my statutes, and profaned my
Sabbaths; a for their heart went after their idols. 17Nevertheless, b my eye
spared them, and I did not destroy them or c make a full end of them in the
wilderness.
18“And I said to d their children in the wilderness, Do not walk e in the
statutes of your fathers, nor keep their rules, f nor defile yourselves with
their idols. 19 g I am the LORD your God; h walk in my statutes, and be
careful to obey my rules, 20and i keep my Sabbaths holy that j they may be
a sign between me and you, that you may know that I am the LORD your
God. 21 k But the children l rebelled against me. m They did not walk in my
statutes and were not careful to obey my rules, by which, if a person does
them, he shall live; they profaned my Sabbaths.
n “Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them and spend my anger
against them in the wilderness. 22[†] o But I withheld my hand p and acted
for the sake of my name, q that it should not be profaned in the sight of the
nations, in whose sight I had brought them out. 23 r Moreover, s I swore to
them in the wilderness t that I would scatter them among the nations and
disperse them through the countries, 24because they had not obeyed my
rules, but had rejected my statutes and profaned my Sabbaths, u and their
eyes were set on their fathers’ idols. 25
v Moreover, I gave them statutes that
were not good and rules by which they could not have life, 26and I defiled
them through w their very gifts w in their offering up all their firstborn, that I
might devastate them. I did it x that they might know that I am the LORD.
27[†]“Therefore, y son of man, speak to the house of Israel and say to
them, Thus says the Lord GOD: In this also your fathers blasphemed me, by
z dealing treacherously with me. 28For when I had brought them into the
land that a I swore to give them, then wherever they saw b any high hill or
any leafy tree, there they offered their sacrifices and there they presented
c the provocation of their offering; there they sent up their pleasing aromas,
and there they poured out their drink offerings. 29(I said to them, d What is
the high place to which you go? So its name is called Bamah [2] to this day.)
30“Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: e Will
you defile yourselves after the manner of your fathers and go f whoring
after their detestable things? 31When you present your gifts and g offer up
your children in fire, [3] you defile yourselves with all your idols to this day.
And h shall I be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? i As I live, declares
the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired of by you.
32[†] j “What is in your mind shall never happen—the thought, k ‘Let us
be like the nations, like the tribes of the countries, l and worship wood and
stone.’
The LORD Will Restore Israel
33[†] i “As I live, declares the Lord GOD, m surely with a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm and n with wrath poured out I will be king over you. 34 o I
will bring you out from the peoples and gather you out of the countries
where you are scattered, with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, and
with wrath poured out. 35 p And I will bring you into the wilderness of the
peoples, q and there I will enter into judgment with you r face to face.
36 s As I entered into judgment with your fathers in the wilderness of the
land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you, declares the Lord
GOD.
37I will make you t pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the
bond of the covenant. 38
u I will purge out the rebels from among you, and
those who transgress against me. v I will bring them out of the land where
they sojourn, w but they shall not enter the land of Israel. x Then you will
know that I am the LORD.
39[†]“As for you, O house of Israel, thus says the Lord GOD: y Go serve
every one of you his idols, now and hereafter, if you will not listen to me;
z but my holy name you shall no more profane with your gifts and your
idols.
40[†] a “For on my holy mountain, the mountain height of Israel, declares
the Lord GOD, there b all the house of Israel, all of them, shall serve me in
the land. c There I will accept them, and there I will require your
contributions and the choicest of your gifts, with all your sacred offerings.
41As a pleasing aroma I will accept you, when d I bring you out from the
peoples and gather you out of the countries where you have been scattered.
And e I will manifest my holiness among you in the sight of the nations.
42 f And you shall know that I am the LORD, when I bring you into the land
of Israel, the country that g I swore to give to your fathers. 43 h And there
you shall remember your ways and all your deeds with which you have
defiled yourselves, h and you shall loathe yourselves for all the evils that
you have committed. 44And you shall know that I am the LORD, i when I
deal with you for my name’s sake, j not according to your evil ways, nor
according to your corrupt deeds, O house of Israel, declares the Lord GOD.”
45[†] [4] And the word of the LORD came to me: 46 k “Son of man, l set
your face toward the southland; [5] m preach against the south, and prophesy
against the forest land in the Negeb. 47Say to the forest of the Negeb, Hear
the word of the LORD: Thus says the Lord GOD, Behold, n I will kindle a fire
in you, and it shall devour every o green tree in you and every o dry tree.
The blazing flame shall not be quenched, and p all faces from south to north
shall be scorched by it. 48 q All flesh shall see that I the LORD have kindled
it; it shall not be quenched.” 49Then I said, r “Ah, Lord GOD! They are
saying of me, s ‘Is he not a maker of parables?’”
The LORD Has Drawn His Sword