EZEKIEL 28 [†]The word of the LORD came to me: 2[†] h “Son of man, say
to i the prince of Tyre, Thus says the Lord GOD:
j “Because your heart is proud,
and k you have said, ‘I am a god,
I sit in the seat of the gods,
in the heart of the seas,’
yet l you are but a man, and no god,
m though you make your heart like the heart of a god—
3 n you are indeed wiser o than p Daniel;
no secret is hidden from you;
4 by your wisdom and your understanding
q you have made wealth for yourself,
and have gathered gold and silver
into your treasuries;
5 by your great wisdom in your trade
you have increased your wealth,
and j your heart has become proud in your wealth—
6 therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
r Because you make your heart
like the heart of a god,
7[†] therefore, behold, I will bring s foreigners upon you,
the most ruthless of the nations;
and they shall draw their swords against t the beauty of your wisdom
and defile t your splendor.
8 u They shall thrust you down into the pit,
v and you shall die the death of the slain
in the heart of the seas.
9 w Will you still say, ‘I am a god,’
in the presence of those who kill you,
though l you are but a man, and no god,
in the hands of those who slay you?
10
x You shall die the death of the uncircumcised
by the hand of foreigners;
y for I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.”
A Lament over the King of Tyre
11[†]Moreover, the word of the LORD came to me: 12
z “Son of man, a raise a
lamentation over b the king of Tyre, and say to him, Thus says the Lord
GOD:
“You were the signet of perfection, [1]
c full of wisdom and d perfect in beauty.
13 You were in e Eden, the garden of God;
f every precious stone was your covering,
g sardius, topaz, and diamond,
beryl, onyx, and jasper,
sapphire, [2] f emerald, and carbuncle;
and crafted in gold were your settings
and your engravings. [3]
i On the day that you were created
they were prepared.
14 You were an anointed j guardian cherub.
I placed you; [4] you were on k the holy mountain of God;
in the midst of the stones of fire you walked.
15 You were blameless in your ways
l from the day you were created,
till unrighteousness was found in you.
16 In the abundance of m your trade
you were filled with violence in your midst, and you sinned;
so I cast you as a profane thing from k the mountain of God,
and I destroyed you, [5] j O guardian cherub,
from the midst of the stones of fire.
17 n Your heart was proud because of o your beauty;
you corrupted your wisdom for the sake of your splendor.
I cast you to the ground;
I exposed you before kings,
to feast their eyes on you.
18 By the multitude of your iniquities,
in the unrighteousness of your trade
you profaned your sanctuaries;
so p I brought fire out from your midst;
it consumed you,
and I turned you to ashes on the earth
q in the sight of all who saw you.
19 All who know you among the peoples
are appalled at you;
r you have come to a dreadful end
and shall be no more forever.”
Prophecy Against Sidon
20[†]The word of the LORD came to me: 21 s “Son of man, t set your face
toward u Sidon, and t prophesy against her 22and say, Thus says the Lord
GOD:
“Behold, v I am against you, O Sidon,
and w I will manifest my glory in your midst.
And x they shall know that I am the LORD
y when I execute judgments in her
and z manifest my holiness in her;
23 for I will send a pestilence into her,
and blood into her streets;
and the slain shall fall in her midst,
by the sword that is against her on every side.
Then they will know that I am the LORD.
24[†]“And for the house of Israel b there shall be no more a brier to prick
or c a thorn to hurt them among all their neighbors d who have treated them
with contempt. Then they will know that I am the Lord GOD.
Israel Gathered in Security
25“Thus says the Lord GOD: e When I gather the house of Israel from the
peoples among whom they are scattered, and z manifest my holiness in
them in the sight of the nations, f then they shall dwell in their own land that
I gave to my servant Jacob. 26 g And they shall dwell securely in it, and they
shall build houses and plant vineyards. They shall dwell securely, h when I
execute judgments upon all their neighbors d who have treated them with
contempt. x Then they will know that I am the LORD their God.”
Prophecy Against Egypt