EZEKIEL 43 [†]Then he led me to b the gate, the gate facing east. 2And
behold, c the glory of the God of Israel was coming from the east. And d the
sound of his coming was like the sound of many waters, and e the earth
shone with his glory.
3And f the vision I saw was just like the vision that I
had seen g when he [1] came to destroy the city, and just like h the vision that
I had seen i by the Chebar canal. And j I fell on my face. 4As c the glory of
the LORD k entered the temple by the gate facing east, 5 l the Spirit lifted me
up and brought me into m the inner court; and behold, n the glory of the
LORD filled the temple.
6[†] o While the man was standing beside me, p I heard one speaking to
me out of the temple, 7and he said to me, q “Son of man, this is r the place
of my throne and s the place of the soles of my feet, t where I will dwell in
the midst of the people of Israel forever. And the house of Israel shall no
more u defile my holy name, neither they, nor their kings, by their whoring
and by the dead bodies [2] of their kings at their high places, [3] 8by setting
their threshold by my threshold and their doorposts beside my doorposts,
with v only a wall between me and them. They have w defiled my holy
name by their abominations that they have committed, so I have consumed
them in my anger.
9Now let them put away their whoring and the dead
bodies of their kings far from me, t and I will dwell in their midst forever.
10“As for you, q son of man, x describe to the house of Israel the temple,
that they may be ashamed of their iniquities; and they shall measure the
plan. 11And if they are ashamed of all that they have done, x make known to
them the design of the temple, its arrangement, y its exits and its entrances,
that is, its whole design; and make known to them as well all its statutes and
its whole design and all its laws, and write it down z in their sight, so that
they may observe all its laws and all its statutes and carry them out. 12This
is the law of the temple: the whole territory on the top of a the mountain
b all around shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the temple.
The Altar
13[†]“These are the measurements of c the altar by cubits (the cubit being
d a cubit and a handbreadth): [4] its base shall be one cubit high [5] and one
cubit broad, with a rim of one span [6] around its edge. And this shall be the
height of the altar: 14from the base on the ground to the lower ledge, two
cubits, with a breadth of one cubit; and from the smaller ledge to the larger
ledge, four cubits, with a breadth of one cubit; 15and the altar hearth, four
cubits; and from the altar hearth projecting upward, e four horns. 16The altar
hearth shall be f square, twelve cubits long by twelve broad. 17The ledge
also shall be square, fourteen cubits long by fourteen broad, with a rim
around it half a cubit broad, and its base one cubit all around. g The steps of
the altar shall face east.”
18[†]And he said to me, h “Son of man, thus says the Lord GOD: These
are the ordinances for the altar: On the day when it is erected for offering
burnt offerings upon it and i for throwing blood against it, 19you shall give
to j the Levitical priests k of the family of Zadok, who draw near to me to
minister to me, declares the Lord GOD, l a bull from the herd for a sin
offering. 20And m you shall take some of its blood and put it on e the four
horns of the altar and on the four corners of the ledge and upon n the rim all
around. o Thus you shall purify the altar and make atonement for it. 21You
shall also take the bull of the sin offering, and p it shall be burned in the
appointed place belonging to the temple, outside the sacred area. 22And on
the second day you shall offer a male goat without blemish for a sin
offering; and the altar shall be purified, as it was purified with the bull.
23When you have finished o purifying it, you shall offer a bull from the herd
without blemish and q a ram from the flock without blemish. 24You shall
present them before the LORD, and the priests r shall sprinkle salt on them
and offer them up as a burnt offering to the LORD.
25 s For seven days you
shall provide daily a male goat for a sin offering; also, a bull from the herd
and a ram from the flock, without blemish, shall be provided. 26Seven days
shall they make atonement for the altar and cleanse it, and so consecrate
it. [7] 27And when they have completed these days, then t from the eighth
day onward the priests shall offer on the altar your burnt offerings and your
u peace offerings, and v I will accept you, declares the Lord GOD.”
The Gate for the Prince