EZEKIEL 39 [†]“And you, q son of man, r prophesy against s Gog and
say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, t I am against you, O Gog, u chief
prince of v Meshech [1] and v Tubal. 2 w And I will turn you about and drive
you forward, and bring you up from x the uttermost parts of the north, and
lead you against the y mountains of Israel. 3Then z I will strike your bow
from your left hand, and z will make your arrows drop out of your right
hand. 4
a You shall fall on y the mountains of Israel, you and all your
b hordes and the peoples who are with you. c I will give you to birds of prey
of every sort and to the beasts of the field to be devoured. 5You shall fall in
the open field, for d I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.
6
e I will send fire
on f Magog and on those g who dwell securely in h the coastlands, and
i they shall know that I am the LORD.
7“And j my holy name I will make known in the midst of my people
Israel, and k I will not let my holy name be profaned anymore. And l the
nations shall know that I am m the LORD, the Holy One in Israel. 8
n Behold,
it is coming and it will be brought about, declares the Lord GOD. That is the
day o of which I have spoken.
9[†]“Then those who dwell in the cities of Israel will go out and p make
fires of the weapons and burn them, shields and bucklers, bow and arrows,
q clubs [2] and spears; and they will make fires of them for seven years, 10so
that they will not need to take wood out of the field or cut down any out of
the forests, for p they will make their fires of the weapons. r They will seize
the spoil of those who despoiled them, and plunder those who plundered
them, declares the Lord GOD.
11“On that day I will give to s Gog a place for burial in Israel, the Valley
of the Travelers, east of the sea. It will block the travelers, for there Gog
and all his multitude will be buried. It will be called the Valley of t Hamon-
gog. [3] 12For u seven months the house of Israel will be burying them, in
order v to cleanse the land. 13All the people of the land will bury them, and
it will bring them renown on the day that w I show my glory, declares the
Lord GOD.
14They will set apart men to travel through the land regularly
and bury those travelers remaining on the face of the land, so as v to cleanse
it. At [4] the end of x seven months they will make their search. 15And when
these travel through the land and anyone sees a human bone, then he shall
set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the Valley of y Hamon-
gog. 16(Hamonah [5] is also the name of the city.) Thus shall they cleanse the
land.
17“As for you, z son of man, thus says the Lord GOD: a Speak to b the
birds of every sort and to b all beasts of the field, ‘Assemble and come,
gather from all around to c the sacrificial feast that I am preparing for you, a
great sacrificial feast on the mountains of Israel, and you shall eat flesh and
drink blood. 18 d You shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of
the princes of the earth—of rams, of lambs, and of he-goats, of bulls, all of
them e fat beasts of Bashan. 19And you shall eat fat till you are filled, and
drink blood till you are drunk, at the sacrificial feast that I am preparing for
you. 20And you shall be filled at my table with horses and charioteers, with
mighty men and all kinds of warriors,’ declares the Lord GOD.
21[†]“And f I will set my glory among the nations, and all the nations
shall see g my judgment that I have executed, and g my hand that I have laid
on them. 22 h The house of Israel shall know that I am the LORD their God,
from that day forward. 23And i the nations shall know that the house of
Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they dealt so
treacherously with me that j I hid my face from them and k gave them into
the hand of their adversaries, and they all fell by the sword. 24I dealt with
them l according to their uncleanness and their transgressions, and hid my
face from them.
The LORD Will Restore Israel
25[†]“Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Now m I will restore the fortunes
of Jacob and have mercy on n the whole house of Israel, and o I will be
jealous for my holy name. 26They shall p forget their shame and all the
treachery they have practiced against me, when q they dwell securely in
their land with r none to make them afraid, 27
s when I have brought them
back from the peoples and gathered them from their enemies’ lands, t and
through them have vindicated my holiness in the sight of many nations.
28 h Then they shall know that I am the LORD their God, because I sent them
into exile among the nations and then assembled them into their own land. I
will leave none of them remaining among the nations anymore. 29
u And I
will not hide my face anymore from them, when v I pour out my Spirit upon
the house of Israel, declares the Lord GOD.”
Vision of the New Temple