EZRA 9 [†]After these things had been done, the officials approached me
and said, “The people of Israel and the priests and the e Levites have not
separated themselves from the peoples of the lands f with their
abominations, from the g Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the
Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.
2
h For they have taken some of their daughters to be wives for themselves
and for their sons, so that the i holy race [1] has j mixed itself with the
peoples of the lands. And in this faithlessness the hand of the officials and
chief men has been foremost.” 3[†]As soon as I heard this, I k tore my
garment and my cloak and pulled hair from my head and beard and l sat
appalled. 4[†]Then all who m trembled at the words of the God of Israel,
because of the faithlessness of the returned exiles, gathered around me
while I sat n appalled until the evening sacrifice. 5And at the n evening
sacrifice I rose from my fasting, with my garment k and my cloak torn, and
fell upon my knees o and spread out my hands to the LORD my God,
6[†]saying:
“O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift my face to you, my God, for
our iniquities p have risen higher than our heads, and our q guilt has
r mounted up to the heavens. 7[†] s From the days of our fathers to this day
we have been in great q guilt. And for our iniquities we, our kings, and our
priests have been given into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword,
to captivity, to plundering, t and to utter shame, as it is today.
8[†]But now
for a brief moment favor has been shown by the LORD our God, to leave us
a u remnant and to give us a v secure hold [2] within his holy place, that our
God may w brighten our eyes and grant us a little reviving in our slavery.
9[†] x For we are slaves. Yet our God has not forsaken us in our slavery, y but
has extended to us his steadfast love before the kings of Persia, to grant us
some reviving to set up the house of our God, to repair its ruins, and to give
us protection [3] in Judea and Jerusalem.
10[†]“And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? For we have
forsaken your commandments, 11which you commanded by your servants
the prophets, saying, ‘The land that you are entering, to take possession of
it, is a land impure with the impurity of the peoples of the lands, with their
abominations that have filled it from end to end with z their uncleanness.
12
a Therefore do not give your daughters to their sons, neither take their
daughters for your sons, and never seek their peace or prosperity, that you
may be strong and eat the good of the land b and leave it for an inheritance
to your children forever.’ 13And after all that has come upon us for our evil
deeds and for c our great guilt, seeing that you, our d God, have punished us
less than our iniquities deserved and have given us such a e remnant as this,
14shall we break your commandments again and f intermarry with the
peoples who practice these abominations? Would you not be angry with us
g until you consumed us, so that there should be no e remnant, nor any to
escape? 15O LORD, the God of Israel, you are just, for we are left a
e remnant that has escaped, as it is today. Behold, we are before you in our
h guilt, i for none can stand before you because of this.”
The People Confess Their Sin