EZRA 8 [†]These are the heads of their fathers’ houses, and this is the
genealogy of those who went up with me from Babylonia, in the reign of
Artaxerxes the king: 2Of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom. Of the sons of
u Ithamar, Daniel. Of the sons of David, v Hattush. 3Of the sons of
Shecaniah, who was of the sons of w Parosh, Zechariah, with whom were
registered 150 men. 4 x Of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai the son of
Zerahiah, and with him 200 men. 5Of the sons of Zattu, [1] Shecaniah the
son of Jahaziel, and with him 300 men. 6Of the sons of Adin, Ebed the son
of Jonathan, and with him 50 men. 7Of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah the son
of Athaliah, and with him 70 men. 8Of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah the
son of Michael, and with him 80 men. 9Of the sons of Joab, Obadiah the
son of Jehiel, and with him 218 men. 10Of the sons of Bani, [2] Shelomith
the son of Josiphiah, and with him 160 men. 11
y Of the sons of Bebai,
Zechariah, the son of Bebai, and with him 28 men. 12Of the sons of Azgad,
Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with him 110 men. 13Of the sons of
Adonikam, those who came later, their names being Eliphelet, Jeuel, and
Shemaiah, and with them 60 men. 14Of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and
Zaccur, and with them 70 men.
Ezra Sends for Levites
15[†]I gathered them to the river that runs to z Ahava, and there we camped
three days. As I reviewed the people and the priests, I found there a none of
the sons of Levi. 16Then I sent for Eliezer, Ariel, Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib,
Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah, and b Meshullam, leading men, and for
Joiarib and Elnathan, who were men of insight, 17[†]and sent them to Iddo,
the leading man at the place Casiphia, telling them what to say to Iddo and
his brothers and [3] the temple servants at the place Casiphia, namely, to
send us ministers for the house of our God. 18And c by the good hand of our
God on us, they brought us a man of discretion, of the sons of d Mahli the
son of Levi, son of Israel, namely Sherebiah with his sons and kinsmen, 18;
19also e Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of f the sons of Merari, with his
kinsmen and their sons, 20; 20 g besides 220 of the temple servants, whom
David and his officials had set apart to attend the Levites. These were all
h mentioned by name.
Fasting and Prayer for Protection
21[†] i Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river j Ahava, that we might
humble ourselves before our God, k to seek from him a safe journey for
ourselves, our children, and all our goods. 22[†]For I was ashamed to ask
the king for a band of soldiers and horsemen to protect us against the enemy
on our way, since we had told the king, l “The hand of our God is for good
on m all who seek him, and the power of his wrath is against all who forsake
him.” 23So we fasted and implored our God for this, and he listened to our
entreaty.
Priests to Guard Offerings
24Then I set apart twelve of the leading priests: e Sherebiah, e Hashabiah,
and ten of their kinsmen with them. 25And I weighed out to them the
n silver and the gold and the vessels, the offering for the house of our God
that the king and his o counselors and his lords and all Israel there present
had offered. 26[†] p I weighed out into their hand 650 talents [4] of silver, and
silver vessels worth 200 talents, [5] and 100 talents of gold, 2720 bowls of
gold worth 1,000 darics, [6] and two vessels of fine bright bronze as
precious as gold. 28[†]And I said to them, q “You are holy to the LORD, and
r the vessels are holy, and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering to
the LORD, the God of your fathers. 29Guard them and keep them until you
weigh them before the chief priests and the Levites and the heads of fathers’
houses in Israel at Jerusalem, s within the chambers of the house of the
LORD.” 30So the priests and the Levites p took over the weight of the silver
and the gold and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem, to the house of our
God.
31[†]Then we departed from the river Ahava t on the twelfth day of the
first month, to go to Jerusalem. u The hand of our God was on us, and he
delivered us from the hand of the enemy and from ambushes by the way.
32[†] v We came to Jerusalem, and there we remained three days. 33On the
fourth day, within the house of our God, the silver and the gold and the
vessels were w weighed into the hands of x Meremoth the priest, son of
Uriah, and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas, and with them were
the Levites, y Jozabad the son of Jeshua and Noadiah the son of z Binnui.
34The whole was counted and weighed, and the weight of everything was
recorded.
35[†]At that time a those who had come from captivity, the returned
exiles, offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel, b twelve bulls for all
Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, and as a sin offering twelve
male goats. All this was a burnt offering to the LORD.
36 c They also
delivered the king’s commissions to the king’s d satraps [7] and to the
governors of the province Beyond the River, and they aided the people and
the house of God.
Ezra Prays About Intermarriage