EZRA 3 [†] k When the seventh month came, and the children of Israel were
in the towns, the people gathered as one man to Jerusalem. 2[†]Then arose
Jeshua the son of Jozadak, with his fellow priests, and l Zerubbabel the son
of m Shealtiel with his kinsmen, and they built the altar of the God of Israel,
to offer burnt offerings on it, n as it is written in the Law of Moses the
o man of God. 3[†]They set the altar in its place, p for fear was on them
because of the peoples of the lands, and q they offered burnt offerings on it
to the LORD, burnt offerings morning and evening. 4[†] r And they kept the
Feast of Booths, s as it is written, t and offered the daily burnt offerings by
number according to the rule, as each day required, 5and after that the
regular burnt u offerings, the offerings at the new moon v and at all the
appointed feasts of the LORD, and the offerings of everyone who made a
freewill offering to the LORD.
6From the first day of the seventh month they
began to offer burnt offerings to the LORD. But the foundation of the temple
of the LORD was not yet laid. 7So they gave money to the masons and the
carpenters, w and food, drink, and oil to the Sidonians and the Tyrians x to
bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea, to Joppa, y according to the grant
that they had from Cyrus king of Persia.
Rebuilding the Temple
8[†]Now in the second year after their coming to the house of God at
Jerusalem, in the second month, z Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and
z Jeshua the son of Jozadak made a beginning, together with the rest of their
kinsmen, the priests and the Levites and all who had come to Jerusalem
from the captivity. They a appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and
upward, to b supervise the work of the house of the LORD.
9And z Jeshua
with his sons and his brothers, and Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah,
together b supervised the workmen in the house of God, along with the
c sons of Henadad and the Levites, their sons and brothers.
10And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the LORD,
the priests in their vestments came forward with trumpets, and the Levites,
the sons of Asaph, with cymbals, to praise the LORD, d according to the
directions of David king of Israel. 11And they sang responsively, praising
and giving thanks to the LORD,
e “For he is good,
for his steadfast love endures forever toward Israel.”
And all the people shouted with a great shout when they praised the LORD,
because the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid. 12[†]But many of
the priests and Levites and heads of fathers’ houses, f old men who had seen
the first house, wept with a loud voice when they saw the foundation of this
house being laid, though many shouted aloud for joy,
13so that the people
could not distinguish the sound of the joyful shout from the sound of the
people’s weeping, for the people shouted with a great shout, and the sound
was heard far away.
Adversaries Oppose the Rebuilding