GALATIANS 6 [†]Brothers, [1] o if anyone is caught in any transgression,
p you who are spiritual should restore him in q a spirit of gentleness. Keep
watch on yourself, lest you too be tempted. 2[†] r Bear one another’s
burdens, and s so fulfill t the law of Christ. 3For u if anyone thinks he is
something, v when he is nothing, he deceives himself. 4But let each one
w test his own work, and then his reason to boast will be in himself alone
and not in his neighbor.
5For x each will have to bear his own load.
6 y Let the one who is taught the word share all good things with the one
who teaches. 7[†] z Do not be deceived: God is not mocked, for a whatever
one sows, that will he also reap. 8For b the one who sows to his own flesh
c will from the flesh reap corruption, but d the one who sows to the Spirit
will from the Spirit reap eternal life. 9And e let us not grow weary of doing
good, for in due season we will reap, f if we do not give up. 10[†]So then,
g as we have opportunity, let us h do good to everyone, and especially to
those who are i of the household of faith.
Final Warning and Benediction
11[†]See with what large letters I am writing to you j with my own hand.
12
k It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh l who would
force you to be circumcised, and only m in order that they may not be
persecuted for the cross of Christ. 13For even those who are circumcised do
not themselves keep the law, but they desire to have you circumcised that
they may boast in your flesh. 14[†]But far be it from me to boast n except in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which [2] the world o has been
crucified to me, and I to the world. 15[†]For p neither circumcision counts
for anything, nor uncircumcision, but q a new creation. 16[†]And as for all
who walk by this rule, r peace and mercy be upon them, and upon s the
Israel of God.
17[†]From now on let no one cause me trouble, for I bear on my body the
marks of Jesus.
18[†] t The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be u with your spirit, brothers.
Amen.
Study Notes for Galatians
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:1–9 Opening. Paul offers a greeting (vv. 1–5). He
then addresses the crisis in the Galatian church (vv. 6–9).
FACT
Paul’s letter to the Galatians was likely written to the churches he
established in the southern part of Galatia during his first missionary
journey (Acts 13:1–14:28). He probably sent the letter from his home
church in Antioch, sometime before the Jerusalem council (see Acts
15:1–31).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:1–5 Many of the typical elements of Paul’s
greetings appear here (e.g., “grace and peace”), but there is no thanksgiving
for or reference to the Galatians’ faith, hope, or love.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:1 apostle. Paul was sent by God to proclaim the
gospel. On apostleship, see notes on Matt. 10:2; Acts 1:20; Rom. 1:1. False
teachers have evidently raised questions about whether Paul should really
be called an apostle (Gal. 2:7–9). not from men nor through man. Paul
stresses both here and in 1:11–12, 16–17, 19 that he received the gospel
directly from the Lord, not from others.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:2 all the brothers . . . with me. Those with Paul
agree with the gospel he proclaims. The Galatians are wrong to accept a
gospel that demands circumcision for salvation.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:3 Grace means God’s unmerited favor. Peace is not
just the absence of conflict. It echoes the OT concept of blessing, in which
the person and community are well and whole in all aspects of life. Such
blessing comes especially in a right relationship with God (e.g., Num. 6:24–
26).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:4 gave himself for our sins. Christ’s saving work
on the cross is central in this letter. Jesus saves Christians from their sins
and sets them free from slavery to this present evil age (3:22–26; 4:1–11).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:6–9 The Galatians are abandoning the true gospel
because of the false teachers. so quickly. It was a short time between Paul’s
first preaching to the Galatians and their present confusion. there are some
who trouble you. Visiting preachers have taught them that circumcision
and obedience to the whole law are essential to justification (see also 4:17;
6:12–13).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:10–2:21 Indirect Appeal: Paul’ s Ministry and the
Gospel. Paul received the gospel directly from Jesus Christ (see Acts 9:1–
19a; 22:3–21; 26:12–23). James, Peter, and John approved his ministry
(Gal. 2:9). Paul had enough authority as an apostle to correct Peter (2:11–
21).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:10–24 Paul’s critics say he teaches a gospel
received from man, not from God. They also say he wants to please man
rather than God. Paul does not simply defend himself but shows a pastoral
concern. He wants to reassure the Galatians that the gospel they received
was authentic. It was not a false message delivered by an untrustworthy
messenger (e.g., 2:5).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:13–14 Paul distances himself from his former life
in Judaism, but he does not reject his identity as an Israelite (see Rom.
11:1). Rather, he has broken with the life of seeking righteousness through
the Law of Moses. the traditions of my fathers. In the first century A.D.,
rabbinic teaching was the foundation of Jewish life, particularly for the
Pharisees (see Mark 7:3–5).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:16 that I might preach him among the Gentiles.
This was Paul’s specific mission.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:17 The journey to Arabia and back to Damascus
occurs between Acts 9:25 and 9:26. On the city of Damascus, see note on
Acts 9:3. Roman Arabia included much of modern Saudi Arabia, Jordan,
and southern Syria.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:18 after three years. If Paul was converted in A.D.
33 (an approximate date), then this visit occurred around A.D. 36. It is
probably the visit to Jerusalem described in Acts 9:26–29. Cephas. Peter.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 1:19–20 none of the other apostles except James.
This implies that James was among “the apostles,” though he was not one
of the original 12 (see note on 1 Cor. 9:4–5).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:1 after fourteen years. Could refer to an additional
14 years after the three years mentioned in 1:18. The 14 years could also
start from Paul’s conversion and include those three. The latter seems
slightly more probable, placing this visit around A.D. 47. It probably
corresponds to Acts 11:29–30 (see note on Acts 11:27–30).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:2 Those who seemed influential probably includes
James, Peter, and John (see v. 9).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:3–4 The Jerusalem apostles agreed that Titus, a
Gentile, did not need to be circumcised. Thus, says Paul, they agreed no
Gentile needed to be circumcised. But some false brothers continued to
disagree. (On circumcision, see Acts 15:1–35; Rom. 2:25–29; 4:9–16; Gal.
5:2–12; 6:12–15.)
Spectrum of Early Beliefs about How Christians Should Relate to
the Law of Moses
Identity Beliefs Examples
Gentile
(professing)
Christians
Jewish and
Gentile
Christians
Jewish
Christians
Jewish
Christians
Jewish
Christians
Jewish
(professing)
Christians
The law has absolutely no claim on their lives. (Presupposed in Rom. 6:1, 16.)
Christians are not under the law covenant even though they are certainly not free from God’s
demands. Kosher food laws could be observed and circumcision practiced as pastoral wisdom
dictated. (Compare 1 Cor. 9:19–23.)
They understood and accepted Paul’s position, but their personal “comfort zone” was to be
observant Jews, at least most of the time. Circumcision and kosher food laws are not
necessary for salvation or maturity, and they shouldn’t be imposed on Gentile believers.
Jewish Christians should observe the traditions of the Mosaic code, even if it was acceptable
for Gentile believers not to see themselves as under its stipulations.
Jewish Christians should observe the Mosaic code, and Gentile believers can come to Christ
through faith alone. However, the really spiritual should want to obey the Mosaic law code
(even if it wasn’t strictly necessary for salvation).
The new covenant was a renewal of the old covenant; Jesus is the Messiah, but his life, death,
and resurrection restored God’s people to faithfulness to the Mosaic covenant. Therefore, if
Paul
Certain men from
James? (Gal.
2:12a)
“Judaizers”
Devout, non-
Christian Jews
Gentiles want to come to the Messiah, they must first become Jews (and be circumcised,
observe kosher and Sabbath laws, etc.). (Compare Acts 15:1–35; Titus 1:10.)
Christians are mistaken about the identity of Jesus, and the Jewish boundaries should not be
opened to the Gentiles. (Compare Acts 21:27–23:11.)
The circumcised
(Rom. 4:12a)
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:7–8 As an apostle, Paul was not inferior to Peter:
Paul was assigned to evangelize the uncircumcised (Gentiles), while Peter
was sent to the circumcised (Jews). Therefore the Galatians should not
consider themselves inferior to any other believers.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:9 pillars. Peter, James, and John were clearly
leaders in the early church. Significantly, they gave the right hand of
fellowship to Barnabas and Paul. This showed that they approved of the
gospel Paul preached and of his ministry to the Gentiles.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:10 the poor. This probably refers mainly to poor
Jewish Christians in Jerusalem. Paul led an effort to help them financially
(see Rom. 15:25–26; 1 Cor. 16:1–3; 2 Corinthians 8–9).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:11–21 Paul was not a people-pleaser (1:10). His
confrontation with Peter proves this.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:11–12 The situation behind this passage is likely
that the men who came from James (from the Jerusalem church)
encouraged Jewish Christians to eat separately and follow kosher dietary
laws. Peter decided to go along with this, perhaps not realizing that his
example would make the Gentile Christians feel like second-class
Christians.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:12 Although it was allowed by Scripture, eating
with the Gentiles would have broken Jewish dietary traditions. The
circumcision party required keeping the Mosaic covenant law regarding
circumcision, food, and special days.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:14 force the Gentiles to live like Jews. Peter was
guilty of hypocrisy (v. 13). He had not been observing food laws previously.
Now he was requiring Gentile Christians to observe Jewish food laws in
order to eat with him.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:16 “Justified” means “counted righteous” or
“declared righteous” by God (see esv footnote). If people obeyed all of
God’s perfect moral standards, they could be justified by their own merits.
But Paul says that this is impossible for anyone to do (see Romans 1–2).
Works of the law means any human effort to be justified by God by
obeying a moral law. We also have believed in Christ Jesus, in order to
be justified by faith in Christ implies that justification is the result of
saving faith. and not by works of the law. No human effort or merit can be
added to faith as a basis for justification (see Acts 13:39; Gal. 3:10–14;
Heb. 10:1–14). On justification, see also notes on Rom. 4:25; Phil. 3:9;
James 2:21.
FACT
Justification by faith alone. False teachers were trying to persuade the
Galatians that they needed to practice circumcision and other outward
ceremonies of the Mosaic law in order to be right with God. But Paul
explains that only through faith in Christ can one be right with God
(2:16).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:18 I would prove myself to be a transgressor.
Ironically, the one who is most clearly seen to be a sinner is not the one
outside of the law (the Gentile), but the one who is under the law.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:19 through the law. The law taught Paul that he
could not be saved by works. Paul has died to the law. He no longer tries to
gain justification by obeying the law. so that I might live to God. Paul has
gained God’s acceptance through justification in Christ. He has an amazing
new freedom to live a life devoted to God.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:20 It is no longer I who live does not mean that
Paul has no personality of his own. It means that he no longer controls his
own life. Rather, Christ who lives in me now directs and empowers all that
he does. the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God.
As Paul trusts Christ moment by moment, Christ works in and through him
in all he does. who loved me and gave himself for me. The crucifixion is a
personal expression of Christ’s love for people as individuals.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 2:21 Christ’s death would have been pointless if
righteousness were through the law. Then people could earn justification
by their obedience. But they can never do this. Sin is so serious that only
the substitutionary, atoning death of God’s Son can deal with the problem.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:1–5:12 Direct Appeals to the Galatians. Paul
gives several reasons why the Galatians should resist false teachers.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:1–5 Paul asks the Galatians five questions. He is
disappointed that they have listened to the false teachers. So he returns to
their experience of how they first came to know Christ.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:1 Who has bewitched you? Paul uses the language
of pagan magic to describe the false teachers’ activities. publicly
portrayed. Paul’s presentation of the gospel to the Galatians was so vivid
that it was as if they had been eyewitnesses of the crucifixion.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:2 Let me ask. Using rhetorical questions, Paul
shows that it is illogical for the Galatians to seek a fuller Christian life by
keeping the law. Receive the Spirit refers to the new covenant activity of
the Holy Spirit that comes after saving faith. From the beginning of the
Christian life, the Spirit sanctifies and empowers believers.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:6–9 Paul issues a second direct appeal to the
Galatians: it is not just their own experience of receiving the gospel by faith
that should teach them that salvation is not by the law but by grace. Rather,
the OT example of Abraham also teaches that it is through genuine faith,
not the law, that one is counted righteous (see Gen. 15:6).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:10 Those who rely on works of the law are under
a curse. They are “cursed” (“condemned”) because they break the law
(2:18).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:11 Habakkuk 2:4 shows that righteousness cannot
be achieved through the law.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:12 Paul uses Lev. 18:5 to show that the law is not
of faith. Paul probably means the same thing here as in Rom. 10:5 (where
Lev. 18:5 is equated with “the righteousness that is based on the law”;
compare Phil. 3:9). The one who does them shall live by them. See note
on Lev. 18:5.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:13 The divine curse is the result of disobedience (v.
10). But the burden of the curse has been lifted by Christ’s work on the
cross.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:14 The coming of the powerful Spirit—the living
presence of God— is a key benefit of the new covenant (see Isa. 44:3;
Galatians 5–6).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:15–18 A covenant or a will cannot be changed. The
promises made to Abraham and to his offspring were not changed when
God gave Moses the law.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:16 God spoke promises to Abraham on several
occasions. Paul probably refers to Gen. 13:15 and 17:8. And to your
offspring. Here Paul sees that the truest fulfillment of these OT promises
comes to one “offspring,” Christ.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:17 came 430 years afterward. Paul is apparently
referring to the Septuagint translation of Ex. 12:40, “The dwelling of the
children of Israel . . . in Egypt and in Canaan was 430 years.” This would
mean 430 years from Abraham to the exodus (the Hebrew text does not
include “and in Canaan”). Another explanation is that Paul is not counting
the time from the first promise to Abraham; instead he is counting from the
last confirmation of that promise to Jacob before he went to Egypt in Gen.
46:3–4. This would then count the time in Egypt as the entire time from the
“promise” to the “law.”
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:19–4:7 The law was never intended to last forever.
Now that the promised Messiah has come, those who believe in him are
sons of God.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:19 the law . . . was added because of
transgressions. This probably means the law was put in place to reveal
people’s sinfulness and need for a savior. put in place through angels by
an intermediary. Deuteronomy 33:2 states that God gave the law “from
the ten thousands of holy ones” (compare Acts 7:53). Moses was God’s
“intermediary” (Lev. 26:46).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:20 Because God is one, his ultimate revelation
comes not through an intermediary but from him alone. This assumes that
whatever comes from Christ comes from the one true God, for Christ is
fully God.
FACT
God’s promises to Abraham. When Abraham believed God’s promises to
him, God counted his faith as righteousness (Gen. 15:6). Paul uses this
precedent to show that God’s promises to Abraham are for all who “hear
with faith,” not just the people of Israel (Gal. 3:1–29).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:22 The law (the Scripture), instead of giving “life”
(v. 21) with God, imprisoned everything under sin (compare Rom. 3:9–
20). Rather than enabling all Israelites to receive the promise, the law was
given so that the single “offspring,” Christ, would receive the blessing.
Therefore the blessing is obtained by faith in Christ, not by obedience to
the law. God was certainly not surprised that the Israelites were unable to
obey the law. In fact, at the end of the giving of the law, Moses foretold that
the Israelites would not obey it (Deut. 31:24–29). Thus the law confirmed
the promise to Abraham, that justification would come only by faith (Gal.
3:6–9, 14, 18).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:23 before faith came. By “faith” Paul means new
covenant faith in Christ (see v. 22). Since Paul uses Abraham as an example
of justification by faith (vv. 6–9, 14, 18), he cannot mean that there was no
saving faith before Christ came. He means that OT believers did not have
knowledge of Christ’s finished work.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:24 The law, as guardian, had positive functions. It
restrained and exposed sin and promised Christ’s coming.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:26 you are all sons of God. Life under the law was
slavery. Life in Christ is marked by the freedom that comes from being
God’s “sons.” The Greek word used for “sons” is a legal term used in the
adoption and inheritance laws of first-century Rome. Here and elsewhere in
Paul’s letters (compare 4:5–7; Rom. 8:14–16, 23), this term refers to the
status of all Christians, both male and female. Having been adopted into
God’s family, they now enjoy all the privileges, responsibilities, and
inheritance rights of God’s children.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:27 Having been baptized, believers have gone
down into death. They have died to the old era of law, sin, and death (Rom.
6:3–4; Gal. 2:19; 6:14). They have come up out of the water as participants
in the new creation (2 Cor. 5:17). put on Christ. As one puts on clothing.
This suggests taking on a new life and purpose through being spiritually
united to Christ.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 3:28 neither Jew nor Greek. In the new creation, the
distinction between Jew and Gentile is removed (see Eph. 2:11–22).
Certainly these Galatians do not have to become Jews to be Christians (see
Gal. 3:14). There is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female
does not imply that there are no differences in how these groups should
relate to each other, for Paul elsewhere teaches slaves (“bondservants”; esv
footnote) and masters differently (Eph. 6:5–9), and husbands and wives
differently (Eph. 5:22–33). Rather, he teaches that old divisions and
wrongful attitudes of superiority and inferiority are abolished, for you are
all one in Christ Jesus. The verse teaches unity within diversity, but not
sameness.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:1–3 When a son is too young to receive his
inheritance, he has no more status than a slave. (On Roman slaves, or
bondservants, see note on 1 Cor. 7:21.) This was the situation of Paul and
his fellow Israelites under the old covenant.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:3 elementary principles. Both here and in v. 9,
these principles for Jews would be the Mosaic law. For Gentiles it would be
the basic concepts of their pagan religions. They were, in terms of their
mind-set and life situation, enslaved.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:4 when the fullness of time had come. God sent
his Son at the right moment in human history. God directed world events
and prepared peoples and nations for Christ, and for the proclamation of the
gospel.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:5 Paul’s adoption imagery probably picks up the
OT concept of God calling Israel his “son.” He combines this with the
Roman notion of adopting a son (who was usually already a grown man) in
order to make him the heir to the family wealth (see also note on 3:26).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:6–7 because you are sons. Because Christians are
now sons, they may receive the inheritance. This begins with the promised
Spirit of his Son. Abba is the Aramaic word for “father” (compare Rom.
8:14–17).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:8–11 The Galatians are in danger of forfeiting
sonship and abandoning the true God. They risk returning to false gods (v.
8) and to worldly ways of life (vv. 9–10).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:8 those that by nature are not gods. Demonic
spirits that controlled the Galatians’ former religion (compare 1 Cor. 10:20).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:9 To know God . . . to be known by God implies a
personal relationship with God. elementary principles. See note on v. 3.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:10 Days and months and seasons and years were
all part of the ceremonial laws of the Mosaic covenant (see Lev. 23:5, 16,
28; 25:4). To require Christians to follow such OT laws is to forfeit the
gospel of justification by faith alone, in Christ alone.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:12–20 As in 3:1–5, Paul reminds the Galatians of
what happened when they heard the gospel. He also contrasts his own
ministry with that of the false teachers.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:12 as I am. Paul is free from following Mosaic
ceremonial regulations. He lives by faith in Christ. as you are. Paul had
become like the Gentiles by not living under Jewish law when ministering
to them.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:13 because of a bodily ailment . . . I preached the
gospel to you. The exact nature of this illness is not known. “Because”
apparently means that Paul had to stay in Galatia because of this illness. He
took that opportunity to preach to them.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:17 The false teachers flatter the Galatians, but only
to receive flattery from them in return. to shut you out. They want to form
an exclusive club of people who observe Jewish ceremonial laws.
FACT
“They” in 4:17 refers to the false teachers who were trying to persuade
the Galatian believers that Paul was wrong about certain important
issues. They avoided persecution and gained favor from the Jews by
requiring circumcision (6:12–13).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:19–20 The Galatians, like little children, have not
been growing. Paul’s deep concern for them is like the pain of childbirth.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:21–31 Paul again emphasizes the difference
between being a free child of God and being a slave to the law, sin, and
false gods. Abraham’s son Ishmael—technically the firstborn—represents
the slave sons of Abraham and thus the enslaving Sinai covenant. Isaac
represents the free sons of Abraham (see Genesis 16–17; 21; Gal. 3:7, 29).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:21 law . . . law. Paul plays on the different
meanings of “law”: it can mean the commandments given by Moses (all of
which the Galatians mistakenly want to obey), but it can also mean the first
five books of the Bible as a whole.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:23 Ishmael was the son born when Abraham and
Sarah tried to have a child through Hagar. The promise is the absolute
opposite of the flesh. A promise is a word from God that will be fulfilled by
God (see Rom. 4:18–21), just as Isaac was born by God’s miraculous work.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:25 Arabia. See note on 1:17. in slavery. The
majority of the people in Jerusalem are Jews who have not turned to Jesus.
As a result, the city is enslaved.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:26–27 All those who believe in Christ belong to the
heavenly Jerusalem. They are the true Israel. As Isaiah prophesied (Isa.
54:1), God will bring about the birth of children where there are none, even
among the Gentiles.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:29 so also it is now. Ishmael persecuted Isaac
(suggested by Gen. 21:9). Now the Jews who seek justification by human
effort persecute Christians, who trust God’s promise of justification by
faith.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 4:30 Cast out the slave woman and her son implies
also the casting out of all who seek justification through their own efforts
instead of through faith.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:1–12 Those who turn to the law for salvation cut
themselves off from salvation.
FACT
To walk by the Spirit means making decisions and choices based on the
Holy Spirit’s guidance (5:16, 25). It also involves relying on the Spirit’s
power to conquer sinful desires (5:17–18). The Spirit will produce
“fruits” of godliness in the believer’s life (5:22–23).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:5 we . . . wait for the hope of righteousness.
Christians do not try to produce perfect righteousness in their lives by their
own efforts. Instead, they wait for God to complete righteousness in them
when they die (Heb. 12:23) or at Christ’s return (1 Cor. 15:49).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:11 If Paul still preached that people had to be
circumcised, then the offense of the cross would be removed. Jesus’ work
on the cross reminds people that their efforts to be right with God outside of
Christ are useless.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:13–6:10 Life in the Spirit and Love. Freedom
from the law does not lead to lawless behavior. By the power of the
Spirit, believers live a new life characterized by love.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:13 freedom. From Mosaic laws, as represented by
circumcision. Opportunity for the flesh means “opportunity to follow your
fallen, sinful desires and act contrary to God’s moral laws.”
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:16–26 Life under the law expresses itself in the
works of the flesh, but those who live by the Spirit bear fruit pleasing to
God.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:16 Having contrasted the flesh with love (vv. 13–
14), Paul now contrasts the flesh with the Spirit. The only way to conquer
the flesh is to yield to the Spirit. walk by the Spirit. Making decisions and
choices according to the Holy Spirit’s guidance, and acting with the
spiritual power that the Spirit supplies. the desires of the flesh. Bodily
cravings and the desires of fallen human nature (see examples in vv. 19–
21).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:18 led by the Spirit. The Greek verb implies an
active, personal involvement by the Holy Spirit in guiding Christians. The
present tense (“if you are being led . . . ”) indicates the Spirit’s ongoing
activity. you are not under the law. The Spirit’s active presence in
believers’ lives shows that they are no longer under the pre-Christian
system (see 3:2, 5, 14; 4:6).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:19 works of the flesh. Without the transforming
work of the Holy Spirit, sinful humans follow wicked desires and actions.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:20 idolatry, sorcery. These are ways to access evil
spiritual beings. They reject the way in which God says he should be
worshiped (see John 14:6). enmity, strife. Rejecting God destroys human
relationships, too.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:21 Drunkenness and orgies are examples of how
people use God’s good gifts in destructive and sinful ways. In the OT, wine
was associated with joy and celebration (e.g., Neh. 8:10; Ps. 104:15; see
note on John 2:3). When abused, however, wine was seen as highly
destructive (Prov. 20:1; 21:17; 23:29–35). Drunkenness is consistently
condemned throughout Scripture (e.g., Eph. 5:18). Sex is a precious gift for
husband and wife. When it is abused it also has highly destructive
consequences (1 Cor. 6:18). those who do such things. Those who act in
this way as a pattern of life. Their outward conduct indicates they are not
born of God. They do not have the Holy Spirit within. They are not God’s
true children.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:22–23 The Spirit defends against sin. He also
produces in Christians the positive traits of godly character.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:24 Again, Christ and the Spirit (v. 25) come
together in the believer’s life. Christians have crucified the flesh. They
have died with Christ to sin (see 6:14; Rom. 6:4–6).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:25 keep in step with the Spirit. A different verb
than in v. 16. It means “walk in line behind a leader.”
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 5:26 Paul probably refers to attitudes that are causing
problems in the Galatian churches (see v. 15). These also describe all who
live according to the flesh (vv. 19–21).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:1–10 Paul illustrates a life of love in the Spirit.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:1 you who are spiritual. This does not refer to an
elite class of Christians. It describes mature and experienced Christians.
They are able to help their troubled brother or sister.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:2 and so fulfill the law of Christ. In a broad sense
this means the entire body of ethical teaching that Jesus gave and endorsed
(see note on 1 Cor. 9:21). In a specific sense it probably refers to the
command to love one’s neighbor as oneself (Matt. 22:39; John 13:34).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:7–8 whatever one sows, that will he also reap.
Paul’s reference to “reaping” has in view the blessings of eternal life that
belong to the believer as the result of “sowing” his life to the Spirit.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:10 While believers await their rewards (vv. 7–9)
they should do good. The primary focus should be on serving other
believers, but not to the exclusion of people outside the church.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:11–18 Final Warning. Paul summarizes the main
themes of the letter and challenges the reader to stay true to the gospel. To
require circumcision is to deny the cross and the new creation. Those who
belong to the new creation are the true Israel.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:11 Paul probably has been dictating the letter to a
scribe (compare Rom. 16:22). Now, however, he adds his “signature” (see 2
Thess. 3:17).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:14 the world has been crucified to me. The world
no longer attracts and influences Paul.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:15 On Christians as a new creation, see 2 Cor.
5:17.
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:16 Israel of God. In contrast to the children of the
“present Jerusalem” (4:25), the true people of God are the believing
children of Abraham (3:7, 29). They belong to “Jerusalem above” (4:26–
27).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:17 The false teachers, and perhaps some of the
Galatian Christians, have been misrepresenting Paul. Paul insists on the
respect that is due his ministry. He is a genuine minister of Christ and has
the scars to prove it—what he calls the marks of Jesus that resulted from
his being persecuted (see 2 Cor. 11:23–27).
GALATIANS—NOTE ON 6:18 Paul’s final prayerful blessing shows that he has
not given up on the Galatians. He still refers to them as brothers and calls
on Christ and the Spirit to give them grace.
E p h e s i a n s
(return to table of contents)
Ephesians 1 • Ephesians 2 • Ephesians 3 • Ephesians 4 • Ephesians 5
Ephesians 6
Introduction to Ephesians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Ephesians
Global Message of Ephesians
Ephesians and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Ephesians
The Global Message of Ephesians for Today
Study Notes
•
Introduction to Ephesians
Introduction to Ephesians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
The apostle Paul wrote this letter to the churches in Ephesus and the
surrounding region c. A.D. 62 while imprisoned in Rome (Acts 28). During this
time he also wrote Colossians and Philemon. All three letters were sent with
Tychicus and Onesimus.
Theme
There are three main themes of Ephesians: (1) Christ has reconciled all creation
to himself and to God; (2) Christ has united people from all nations to himself
and to one another in his church; and (3) Christians must live as new people.
Purpose
Ephesians offers general instruction in the truths of God’s redemptive work in
Christ; the unity of the church among diverse peoples; and proper conduct in
the church, the home, and the world.
Key Themes
1. All people are by nature spiritually dead. They disobey God’s law and are
ruled by Satan (1:7; 2:1–3, 5, 11–12).
2. God predestined his people to redemption and holiness in Christ (1:3–14;
2:4, 8–9).
3. God’s rich mercy in Christ has saved sinners. This free gift is by grace
through faith alone (1:7–8; 2:4–14).
4. Jesus’ saving work was part of redeeming a fallen creation for God. For
this he deserves glory, honor, and authority in this age and the next (1:15–
23; 3:1–13).
5. Jesus unites Jews and Gentiles into his one body, the church, as a new
creation (1:23; 2:10–22; 3:1–21; 4:1–6).
6. Christ’s people are saved to new lives of holiness in thought, word, and
deed. They must reject their old, sinful lifestyles (4:1–3, 17–32; 5:1–20).
7. Holiness in life includes submission to proper authorities, in home and
family life, and those in authority must care for those in submission to
them (5:21–6:9).
8. Jesus has given powerful gifts to his church. These bring unity, maturity,
and defense against the devil and his allies (4:7–16; 6:10–19).
Outline
I. Introduction (1:1–14)
II. Paul’s Prayer of Thanksgiving (1:15–23)
III. Salvation by Grace through Faith (2:1–10)
IV . Unity and the Peace of Christ (2:11–22)
V . Revelation of the Gospel Mystery (3:1–13)
VI. Paul’s Prayer for Strength and Insight (3:14–21)
VII. Unity of the Body of Christ (4:1–16)
VIII. Paul’s Testimony (4:17–24)
IX. Encouragement for a Holy Lifestyle (4:25–32)
X. New Life in Love (5:1–20)
XI. Submission to One Another (5:21–6:9)
XII. The Whole Armor of God (6:10–20)
XIII. Conclusion (6:21–24)
The Setting of Ephesians
c. A.D. 62
Ephesus was a wealthy port city in the Roman province of Asia. It was a
center of learning and was near several key land routes. Paul probably wrote
his letter to the Ephesians while under house arrest in Rome (Acts 28).
The Global Message of Ephesians
The message of Ephesians for the global church is that in Christ God has
reconciled to himself all things by his free grace, and in so doing he has
enabled humans all over the world to be reconciled with one another. In
light of these two great reconciliations, Christians worldwide are
empowered to live a new life of light and love.
Ephesians and Redemptive History
The vision of redemptive history presented in Ephesians stretches all the
way back to the beginning of time and before, and all the way forward to
the end of all things. In Ephesians 1 Paul says that God “chose us in
[Christ] before the foundation of the world” (Eph. 1:4). And at the end of
this passage Paul strains his eyes to look forward to the end, when “we
acquire possession of” our inheritance (1:14). In it all, Jesus is the one
through whom this eternal plan is enacted (1:10; 3:11).
Yet Paul says something startling to his hearers in chapter 3. He says that
there has been a “mystery” kept hidden for countless generations, but which
has now been revealed (Eph. 3:4–5, 9). This mystery is that God’s favor is
not only for the Jews. It is for all people (3:6, 8–9). At the height of human
history, Christ came and made salvation freely available to all those who
have faith in him (2:8–9). The result is that this salvation is now spilling
over the banks of ethnic Israel and flooding out to the nations. There is “one
God and Father of all” (4:6). Because the “dividing wall of hostility”
between us and God has been torn down, the hostility can also be torn down
between us and other people (2:14–16).
Universal Themes in Ephesians
God’ s great love and grace. The grace of God reaches back into eternity
(Eph. 1:3–5). Before the world’s foundation, God himself foreknew and
predestined for salvation a people from every tribe and tongue and people
group. And the grace of God overcomes every possible obstacle: God saved
us not when we were merely sick or wounded, but when we were spiritually
dead (2:1–3). He has demonstrated “the immeasurable riches of his grace in
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus” (2:7), who suffered in our place and is
making all things new. This love stretches the bounds of our comprehension
with a “love of Christ that surpasses knowledge” (3:19). To a world awash
in cynicism, hypocrisy, apathy, and selfishness, Ephesians sends us out with
a message of the boundless love of God in Christ for all kinds of people.
God’ s new people, the church. Ephesians presents a sweeping portrayal
of the way the gospel is uniting diverse people into Christ’s one body, the
church. The radical inclusiveness of Christ’s work is seen throughout the
epistle (Eph. 1:12–13; 2:11–22; 3:1–15; 4:1–7). In Christ, God is gathering
up a people for himself from both Jews and Gentiles. The mystery that has
been kept secret from previous generations, but has now been revealed, is
that the gospel is offered to Gentiles as freely as to Jews (3:6). In Christ,
those who were far off (Gentiles) and those who were near (Jews) have
been brought together through the cross (2:13).
God’ s cosmic scope of redemption. God revealed his saving purposes
down through human history supremely in Christ. He came at “the fullness
of time” (Eph. 1:10) as the climax of all that God has been doing in the
world since the fall of humanity recorded in Genesis 3. The breathtaking
scope of Christ’s redemptive work, Paul says, is “to unite all things in him,
things in heaven and things on earth” (1:10; compare vv. 22–23; 3:11;
4:10). The word “unite” here means to “sum up” or “draw together.” What
happened on a little hill outside Jerusalem two thousand years ago is the
high point for which all of history was preparing and from which all
subsequent history is flowing. God is restoring the entire created order,
starting with humanity (from diverse people groups) but reaching also to the
entire cosmos (3:10; 6:10–18).
Spiritual warfare. Ephesians 6 is the Bible’s clearest teaching that the
fundamental struggle of believers is not against other people but against the
spiritual forces of hell (Eph. 6:10–18). Around the world today, the church
experiences various kinds of spiritual warfare. Sometimes it is more
sensational, in the form of witchcraft or demon-possession. Other times it is
less obvious and manifests itself in difficulties such as depression,
hopelessness, or circumstantial adversity. While we must be careful not to
think that every difficulty in this fallen world is the direct activity of Satan,
global Christians recognize that their real conflict is with the forces of hell.
The Global Message of Ephesians for Today
Mercy received. The mercy of God in Jesus Christ is the high point of all
history, and for the past two thousand years God’s mercy has been running
throughout the world to bring together all kinds of people to form one new
family of God. This astonishing love of God in Christ reconciles us to God
as we receive his love with nothing but the empty hands of faith. God is
“rich in mercy” (Eph. 2:4), but he does not extend this mercy to those who
think they are worthy of it. Rather, this mercy is for all those who, by grace,
know that they are unworthy of it.
Mercy transforming. Yet while God’s grace is utterly undeserved and in
no way dependent on our good works (Eph. 2:8–9), it does change us.
Those united to Christ are those who are now indwelt by the Spirit (1:13–
14; 3:16; 4:30; 6:17–18). They are transformed. They are now empowered
to “be imitators of God, as beloved children” (5:1). We are his beloved sons
and daughters; it is our joy to imitate the Father.
Mercy extended. When, as global Christians, we look around our own
neighborhoods and around the world, we realize that we are called to live
out the new life that has been granted to us. This includes ridding ourselves
of what does not fit the new life of light and purity into which we have been
swept up (Eph. 5:8–9). Sexual immorality, degrading speech, falsehood,
bitterness, and anger have no place in our lives anymore (4:17–32). It is not
who we are. Not only do we seek purity for ourselves, we also seek God’s
blessing in our relationships. In our marriages, jobs, and families, we are
called to be mindful of the Lord and to love as we have been loved (5:22–
6:9).
In all of this we are seeking to celebrate and to spread the peace, the
shalom, the flourishing, that has dawned in Christ (Eph. 1:2; 2:14–15, 17;
4:3; 6:15, 23). By his Spirit God is restoring the entire cosmos back to the
way it was meant to be. As those who have been granted the Spirit (1:13–
14; 4:30), it is our great joy and privilege to be instruments of God’s mercy
and peace. Most of us will not change the world, or our own nation, by
serving in political office or writing new legislation. Our call is, in fact, far
greater: to love those across whose paths God brings us each day. This is a
calling whose significance will be revealed and celebrated on the last great
day, when Christ comes again. This is a love that springs from our love for
Christ, which is, as the last word of Ephesians puts it, “incorruptible”
(6:24).
Greeting