GENESIS 13 [†]So Abram went up from Egypt, he and his wife and all that
he had, and Lot with him, a into the Negeb.
2 b Now Abram was very rich in livestock, in silver, and in gold. 3And he
journeyed on from the Negeb as far as Bethel to the place where his tent
had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai, 4to c the place where he
had made an altar at the first. And there Abram called upon the name of the
LORD.
5And Lot, who went with Abram, also had flocks and herds and
tents, 6so that d the land could not support both of them dwelling together;
for their possessions were so great that they could not dwell together,
7[†] e and there was strife between the herdsmen of Abram’s livestock and
the herdsmen of Lot’s livestock. At that time f the Canaanites and the
Perizzites were dwelling in the land.
8Then Abram said to Lot, g “Let there be no strife between you and me,
and between your herdsmen and my herdsmen, h for we are kinsmen. [1]
9 i Is not the whole land before you? Separate yourself from me. If you take
the left hand, then I will go to the right, or if you take the right hand, then I
will go to the left.” 10[†]And Lot lifted up his eyes and saw that the j Jordan
Valley was well watered everywhere like k the garden of the LORD, like the
land of Egypt, in the direction of l Zoar. (This was before the LORD
m destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.) 11[†]So Lot chose for himself all the
Jordan Valley, and Lot journeyed east. Thus they separated from each other.
12Abram settled in the land of Canaan, while Lot settled among the cities of
the valley and moved his tent as far as Sodom. 13Now the men of Sodom
n were wicked, great sinners against the LORD.
14[†]The LORD said to Abram, after Lot had separated from him, “Lift up
your eyes and look from the place where you are, o northward and
southward and eastward and westward, 15for all the land that you see I will
give p to you and q to your offspring forever.
16 r I will make your offspring
as the dust of the earth, so that if one can count the dust of the earth, your
offspring also can be counted. 17Arise, walk through the length and the
breadth of the land, for I will give it to you.” 18[†]So Abram moved his tent
and came and s settled by the t oaks [2] of Mamre, which u are at Hebron,
and there he built an altar to the LORD.
Abram Rescues Lot