GENESIS 47 [†]So Joseph q went in and told Pharaoh, “My father and my
brothers, with their flocks and herds and all that they possess, have come
from the land of Canaan. They are now in r the land of Goshen.” 2And from
among his brothers he took five men and s presented them to Pharaoh.
3Pharaoh said to his brothers, t “What is your occupation?” And they said to
Pharaoh, u “Your servants are shepherds, as our fathers were.” 4They said to
Pharaoh, v “We have come to sojourn in the land, for there is no pasture for
your servants’ flocks, for the famine is severe in the land of Canaan. And
now, please let your servants dwell w in the land of Goshen.” 5Then
Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Your father and your brothers have come to you.
6The land of Egypt is before you. Settle your father and your brothers x in
the best of the land. y Let them settle in the land of Goshen, and if you
know any z able men among them, put them in charge of my livestock.”
7[†]Then Joseph brought in Jacob his father and stood him before
Pharaoh, a and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. 8And Pharaoh said to Jacob, “How
many are the days of the years of your life?” 9And Jacob said to Pharaoh,
“The days of the years of my b sojourning are 130 years. c Few and evil
have been the days of the years of my life, and d they have not attained to
the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their
b sojourning.” 10And Jacob e blessed Pharaoh and went out from the
presence of Pharaoh. 11[†]Then Joseph settled his father and his brothers
and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in
the land of f Rameses, g as Pharaoh had commanded. 12And Joseph
h provided his father, his brothers, and all his father’s household with food,
according to the number of their dependents.
Joseph and the Famine
13[†]Now there was no food in all the land, for the famine was very severe,
so that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan languished by reason of the
famine. 14 i And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land
of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, in exchange for the grain that they
bought. And Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh’s house. 15[†]And
when the money was all spent in the land of Egypt and in the land of
Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph and said, “Give us food. j Why
should we die before your eyes? For our money is gone.” 16And Joseph
answered, “Give your livestock, and I will give you food in exchange for
your livestock, if your money is gone.” 17So they brought their livestock to
Joseph, and Joseph gave them food in exchange for the horses, the flocks,
the herds, and the donkeys. He supplied them with food in exchange for all
their livestock that year.
18[†]And when that year was ended, they came to
him the following year and said to him, “We will not hide from my lord that
our money is all spent. The herds of livestock are my lord’s. There is
nothing left in the sight of my lord but our bodies and our land. 19Why
should we die before your eyes, both we and our land? k Buy us and our
land for food, and we with our land will be servants to Pharaoh. And give us
seed that we may live and not die, and that the land may not be desolate.”
20So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh, for all the
Egyptians sold their fields, because the famine was severe on them. The
land became Pharaoh’s. 21As for the people, he made servants of them [1]
from one end of Egypt to the other.
22
l Only the land of the priests he did
not buy, for the priests had a fixed allowance from Pharaoh and lived on the
allowance that Pharaoh gave them; therefore they did not sell their land.
23Then Joseph said to the people, “Behold, I have this day bought you
and your land for Pharaoh. Now here is seed for you, and you shall sow the
land. 24And at the harvests you shall give a m fifth to Pharaoh, and four
fifths shall be your own, as seed for the field and as food for yourselves and
your households, and as food for your little ones.” 25And they said, “You
have saved our lives; n may it please my lord, we will be servants to
Pharaoh.” 26So Joseph made it a statute concerning the land of Egypt, and it
stands to this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth; o the land of the
priests alone did not become Pharaoh’s.
27[†]Thus Israel settled in the land of Egypt, p in the land of Goshen.
q And they gained possessions in it, and were fruitful and multiplied greatly.
28[†]And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years. r So the days of
Jacob, the years of his life, were 147 years.
29And s when the time drew near that Israel must die, he called his son
Joseph and said to him, “If now t I have found favor in your sight, u put
your hand under my thigh and v promise to deal kindly and truly with me.
w Do not bury me in Egypt, 30but let me lie with my fathers. Carry me out
of Egypt and x bury me in their burying place.” He answered, “I will do as
you have said.” 31And he said, “Swear to me”; and he swore to him. Then
y Israel bowed himself upon the head of his bed. [2]
Jacob Blesses Ephraim and Manasseh