GENESIS 15 [†]After these things the word of the LORD came to Abram in a
vision: c “Fear not, Abram, I am d your shield; your reward shall be very
great.” 2[†]But Abram said, “O Lord GOD, what will you give me, for I
continue [1] childless, and the heir of my house is Eliezer of Damascus?”
3And Abram said, “Behold, you have given me no offspring, and e a
member of my household will be my heir.” 4And behold, the word of the
LORD came to him: “This man shall not be your heir; f your very own son [2]
shall be your heir.” 5And he brought him outside and said, “Look toward
heaven, and g number the stars, if you are able to number them.” Then he
said to him, h “So shall your offspring be.” 6[†]And i he believed the LORD,
and j he counted it to him as righteousness.
7And he said to him, “I am the LORD who k brought you out from Ur of
the Chaldeans l to give you this land to possess.” 8But he said, “O Lord
GOD, m how am I to know that I shall possess it?” 9[†]He said to him,
“Bring me a heifer three years old, a female goat three years old, a ram
three years old, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.” 10And he brought him all
these, n cut them in half, and laid each half over against the other. But o he
did not cut the birds in half. 11And when birds of prey came down on the
carcasses, Abram drove them away.
12As the sun was going down, a p deep sleep fell on Abram. And behold,
dreadful and great darkness fell upon him. 13[†]Then the LORD said to
Abram, “Know for certain q that your offspring will be sojourners in a land
that is not theirs and will be servants there, and r they will be afflicted for
s four hundred years. 14But t I will bring judgment on the nation that they
serve, and afterward u they shall come out with great possessions. 15As for
you, you shall go to your fathers in peace; v you shall be buried in a good
old age. 16And they shall come back here in the fourth generation, for w the
iniquity of the Amorites x is not yet complete.”
17[†]When the sun had gone down and it was dark, behold, a smoking
fire pot and a flaming torch passed between these pieces. 18[†]On that day
the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, y “To your offspring I
give [3] this land, from z the river of Egypt to the great river, the river
Euphrates, 19the land of the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, 20the
Hittites, the Perizzites, the Rephaim, 21the Amorites, the Canaanites, the
Girgashites and the Jebusites.”
Sarai and Hagar