GENESIS 28 [†]Then Isaac called Jacob g and blessed him and directed him,
f “You must not take a wife from the Canaanite women. 2 h Arise, go to
Paddan-aram to the house of i Bethuel your mother’s father, and take as
your wife from there one of the daughters of Laban your mother’s brother.
3[†] j God Almighty [1] bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you,
that you may become a company of peoples. 4May he give k the blessing of
Abraham to you and to your offspring with you, that you may take
possession of l the land of your sojournings that God gave to Abraham!”
5Thus Isaac sent Jacob away. And he went to Paddan-aram, to Laban, the
son of Bethuel the Aramean, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob’s and Esau’s
mother.
Esau Marries an Ishmaelite
6[†]Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to
Paddan-aram to take a wife from there, and that as he blessed him he
directed him, “You must not take a wife from the Canaanite women,” 7and
that Jacob had obeyed his father and his mother and gone to Paddan-aram.
8So when Esau saw m that the Canaanite women did not please Isaac his
father,
9Esau went to Ishmael and took as his wife, besides the wives he
had, n Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, the sister of
o Nebaioth.
Jacob’s Dream
10[†]Jacob left p Beersheba and went toward q Haran. 11And he came to a
certain place and stayed there that night, because the sun had set. Taking
one of the stones of the place, he put it under his head and lay down in that
place to sleep. 12[†]And he r dreamed, and behold, there was a ladder [2] set
up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven. And behold, s the angels
of God were ascending and descending on it! 13[†]And behold, t the LORD
stood above it [3] and said, u “I am the LORD, the God of Abraham your
father and the God of Isaac. v The land on which you lie I will give to you
and to your offspring. 14Your offspring shall be like w the dust of the earth,
and you shall spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and
to the south, and in you and x your offspring shall all the families of the
earth be blessed. 15Behold, y I am with you and will keep you wherever you
go, and z will bring you back to this land. For I will a not leave you until I
have done what I have promised you.” 16[†]Then Jacob awoke from his
sleep and said, “Surely the LORD is b in this place, and I did not know it.”
17And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none
other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.”
18[†]So early in the morning Jacob took the stone that he had put under
his head and set it up c for a pillar d and poured oil on the top of it. 19[†]He
called the name of that place e Bethel, [4] but the name of the city was Luz
at the first. 20[†]Then Jacob f made a vow, saying, “If God will be with me
and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat and
clothing to wear,
21
g so that I come again to my father’s house in peace,
h then the LORD shall be my God, 22[†]and this stone, which I have set up
for a pillar, i shall be God’s house. And j of all that you give me I will give a
full tenth to you.”
Jacob Marries Leah and Rachel