GENESIS 20 [†]From there Abraham journeyed toward the territory of the
Negeb and lived between p Kadesh and Shur; and he q sojourned in r Gerar.
2[†]And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, s “She is my sister.” And
Abimelech king of Gerar sent and took Sarah. 3[†] t But God came to
Abimelech u in a dream by night and said to him, “Behold, you are a dead
man because of the woman whom you have taken, for she is a man’s wife.”
4Now Abimelech had not approached her. So he said, v “Lord, will you kill
an innocent people? 5Did he not himself say to me, ‘She is my sister’? And
she herself said, ‘He is my brother.’ In the integrity of my heart and the
innocence of my hands I have done this.” 6Then God said to him in the
dream, “Yes, I know that you have done this in the integrity of your heart,
and it was I who kept you from sinning w against me. Therefore I did not let
you touch her.
7[†]Now then, return the man’s wife, x for he is a prophet, so
that he will pray for you, and you shall live. But if you do not return her,
know that you shall surely die, you y and all who are yours.”
8So Abimelech rose early in the morning and called all his servants and
told them all these things. And the men were very much afraid. 9[†]Then
Abimelech called Abraham and said to him, “What have you done to us?
And how have I sinned against you, that you have brought on me and my
kingdom a great sin? You have done to me things that ought not to be
done.” 10And Abimelech said to Abraham, “What did you see, that you did
this thing?” 11[†]Abraham said, “I did it because I thought, z ‘There is no
fear of God at all in this place, and a they will kill me because of my wife.’
12[†]Besides, b she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my father though not
the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife. 13And when c God
caused me to wander from my father’s house, I said to her, ‘This is the
kindness you must do me: at every place to which we come, d say of me,
“He is my brother.”’”
14[†]Then Abimelech e took sheep and oxen, and male servants and
female servants, and gave them to Abraham, and returned Sarah his wife to
him. 15And Abimelech said, “Behold, f my land is before you; dwell where
it pleases you.” 16To Sarah he said, “Behold, I have given g your brother a
thousand pieces of silver. It is h a sign of your innocence in the eyes of
all [1] who are with you, and before everyone you are vindicated.” 17[†]Then
i Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech, and also healed his
wife and female slaves so that they bore children. 18For the LORD j had
closed all the wombs of the house of Abimelech because of Sarah,
Abraham’s wife.
The Birth of Isaac