GENESIS 21 [†]The LORD k visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did to
Sarah l as he had promised. 2And Sarah m conceived and bore Abraham a
son in his old age n at the time of which God had spoken to him.
3[†]Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him, whom Sarah
bore him, o Isaac. [1] 4[†]And Abraham p circumcised his son Isaac when he
was eight days old, q as God had commanded him. 5
r Abraham was a
hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him. 6And Sarah said,
s “God has made laughter for me; everyone who hears will laugh over me.”
7And she said, “Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse
children? t Yet I have borne him a son in his old age.”
God Protects Hagar and Ishmael
8[†]And the child grew and was weaned. And Abraham made a great feast
on the day that Isaac was weaned. 9[†]But Sarah u saw the son of Hagar the
Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, v laughing. [2] 10So she said to
Abraham, w “Cast out this slave woman with her son, for the son of this
slave woman shall not be heir with my son Isaac.” 11And the thing was very
displeasing to Abraham on account of his son. 12[†]But God said to
Abraham, “Be not displeased because of the boy and because of your slave
woman. Whatever Sarah says to you, do as she tells you, for x through Isaac
shall your offspring be named. 13And I will make y a nation of the son of
the slave woman also, because he is your offspring.” 14[†]So Abraham rose
early in the morning and took bread and a skin of water and gave it to
Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, along with the child, and sent her away.
And she departed and wandered in the wilderness of z Beersheba.
15When the water in the skin was gone, she put the child under one of the
bushes. 16Then she went and sat down opposite him a good way off, about
the distance of a bowshot, for she said, “Let me not look on the death of the
child.” And as she sat opposite him, she lifted up her voice and wept.
17[†]And God heard the voice of the boy, and the angel of God called to
Hagar from heaven and said to her, “What troubles you, Hagar? Fear not,
for God has heard the voice of the boy where he is. 18Up! Lift up the boy,
and hold him fast with your hand, for I will make him into a great nation.”
19Then a God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water. And she went
and filled the skin with water and gave the boy a drink. 20And God was
with the boy, and he grew up. He lived in the wilderness b and became an
expert with the bow.
21[†]He lived in the wilderness of Paran, and his
mother took a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
A Treaty with Abimelech
22[†]At that time c Abimelech and Phicol the commander of his army said
to Abraham, d “God is with you in all that you do. 23Now therefore swear to
me here by God that you will not deal falsely with me or with my
descendants or with my posterity, but e as I have dealt kindly with you, so
you will deal with me and with the land where you have sojourned.” 24And
Abraham said, “I will swear.”
25[†]When Abraham reproved Abimelech about a well of water that
Abimelech’s servants f had seized, 26Abimelech said, “I do not know who
has done this thing; you did not tell me, and I have not heard of it until
today.” 27So Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them to Abimelech,
and the two men g made a covenant. 28Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the
flock apart. 29And Abimelech said to Abraham, “What is the meaning of
these seven ewe lambs that you have set apart?” 30He said, “These seven
ewe lambs you will take from my hand, that this [3] may be a witness for me
that I dug this well.” 31[†]Therefore h that place was called Beersheba, [4]
because there both of them swore an oath. 32[†]So they made a covenant at
Beersheba. Then Abimelech and Phicol the commander of his army rose up
and returned to the land of the Philistines. 33[†]Abraham planted a tamarisk
tree in Beersheba and i called there on the name of the LORD, j the
Everlasting God. 34And Abraham sojourned many days in the land of the
Philistines.
The Sacrifice of Isaac