GENESIS 17 [†]When Abram was ninety-nine years old the LORD appeared
to Abram and said to him, “I am God Almighty; [1] walk before me, and be
n blameless, 2that I may make my covenant between me and you, and o may
multiply you greatly.” 3Then Abram p fell on his face. And God said to him,
4[†]“Behold, my covenant is with you, and you shall be q the father of a
multitude of nations. 5No longer shall your name be called Abram, [2] but
r your name shall be Abraham, [3] s for I have made you the father of a
multitude of nations. 6[†]I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I will
make t you into nations, and u kings shall come from you. 7And I will
v establish my covenant between me and you and your offspring after you
throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, w to be God to you
and to your offspring after you. 8And x I will give to you and to your
offspring after you the land of your sojournings, all the land of Canaan, for
an everlasting possession, and y I will be their God.”
9And God said to Abraham, “As for you, you shall keep my covenant,
you and your offspring after you throughout their generations. 10[†]This is
my covenant, which you shall keep, between me and you and your offspring
after you: Every male among you shall be circumcised. 11[†]You shall be
circumcised in the flesh of your foreskins, and it shall be a z sign of the
covenant between me and you. 12[†]He who is a eight days old among you
shall be circumcised. Every male throughout your generations, whether
born in your house or b bought with your money from any foreigner who is
not of your offspring, 13both he who is born in your house and he who is
bought with your money, shall surely be circumcised. So shall my covenant
be in your flesh an everlasting covenant. 14[†]Any uncircumcised male who
is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin shall be cut off from his
people; he has broken my covenant.”
Isaac’s Birth Promised
15[†]And God said to Abraham, “As for Sarai your wife, you shall not call
her name Sarai, but Sarah [4] shall be her name. 16I will bless her, and
moreover, I will c give [5] you a son by her. I will bless her, and d she shall
become nations; kings of peoples shall come from her.” 17Then Abraham
e fell on his face f and laughed and said to himself, “Shall a child be born to
a man who is a hundred years old? Shall Sarah, who is ninety years old,
bear a child?” 18And Abraham said to God, “Oh that Ishmael might live
before you!” 19[†]God said, “No, but g Sarah your wife shall bear you a son,
and you shall call his name h Isaac. [6] I will establish my covenant with him
as an everlasting covenant for his offspring after him. 20[†]As for Ishmael, I
have heard you; behold, I have blessed him and will make him fruitful and
i multiply him greatly. He j shall father twelve princes, and k I will make
him into a great nation. 21But l I will establish my covenant with Isaac,
m whom Sarah shall bear to you at this time next year.”
22When he had finished talking with him, n God went up from Abraham.
23Then Abraham took Ishmael his son and all those born in his house or
bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham’s house,
and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins that very day, as God had
said to him. 24Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised
in the flesh of his foreskin. 25And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old
when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 26That very day
Abraham and his son Ishmael were circumcised. 27And all the men of his
house, those born in the house and those bought with money from a
foreigner, were circumcised with him.