GENESIS 7 [†]Then the LORD said to Noah, p “Go into the ark, you and all
your household, for I have seen that q you are righteous before me in this
generation. 2Take with you seven pairs of all r clean animals, [1] the male
and his mate, and a pair of the animals that are not clean, the male and his
mate, 3and seven pairs [2] of the birds of the heavens also, male and female,
to keep their offspring alive on the face of all the earth. 4For in seven days
s I will send rain on the earth forty days and forty nights, t and every living
thing [3] that I have made I will blot out from the face of the ground.”
5 u And Noah did all that the LORD had commanded him.
6Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters came upon the
earth. 7And Noah and his sons and his wife and his sons’ wives with him
went into the ark to escape the waters of the flood. 8Of clean animals, and
of animals that are not clean, and of birds, and of everything that creeps on
the ground, 9two and two, male and female, went into the ark with Noah, as
God had commanded Noah. 10And after seven days the waters of the flood
came upon the earth.
11[†]In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the
seventeenth day of the month, on that day all the v fountains of the great
deep burst forth, and w the windows of the heavens were opened. 12And rain
fell upon the earth forty days and forty nights. 13On the very same day
Noah and his sons, Shem and Ham and Japheth, and Noah’s wife and the
three wives of his sons with them entered the ark, 14they and every beast,
according to its kind, and all the livestock according to their kinds, and
every creeping thing that creeps on the earth, according to its kind, and
every bird, according to its kind, every winged creature. 15They x went into
the ark with Noah, two and two of all flesh in which there was the breath of
life. 16[†]And those that entered, male and female of all flesh, went in y as
God had commanded him. And the LORD shut him in.
17[†]The flood z continued forty days on the earth. The waters increased
and bore up the ark, and it rose high above the earth. 18The waters prevailed
and increased greatly on the earth, and the ark floated on the face of the
waters. 19And the waters prevailed so mightily on the earth that all the high
mountains under the whole heaven were covered. 20The waters prevailed
above the mountains, covering them fifteen cubits [4] deep. 21And a all flesh
died that moved on the earth, birds, livestock, beasts, all swarming creatures
that swarm on the earth, and all mankind. 22Everything on the dry land b in
whose nostrils was the breath of life died. 23He blotted out every living
thing that was on the face of the ground, man and animals and creeping
things and birds of the heavens. They were blotted out from the earth. Only
c Noah was left, and those who were with him in the ark. 24And the waters
prevailed on the earth 150 days.
The Flood Subsides