GENESIS 40 [†]Some time after this, the e cupbearer of the king of Egypt
and his baker committed an offense against their lord the king of Egypt.
2[†]And Pharaoh was angry with his two officers, the chief cupbearer and
the chief baker,
3
f and he put them in custody in the house of the captain of
the guard, in the prison where Joseph was confined. 4[†]The captain of the
guard appointed Joseph to be with them, and he attended them. They
continued for some time in custody.
5[†]And one night they both dreamed—the cupbearer and the baker of
the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison—each his own dream,
and each dream with its own interpretation. 6When Joseph came to them in
the morning, he saw that they were troubled. 7So he asked Pharaoh’s
officers who were with him in custody in his master’s house, g “Why are
your faces downcast today?” 8They said to him, h “We have had dreams,
and there is no one to interpret them.” And Joseph said to them, i “Do not
interpretations belong to God? Please tell them to me.”
9So the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph and said to him, “In my
dream there was a vine before me, 10and on the vine there were three
branches. As soon as it budded, its blossoms shot forth, and the clusters
ripened into grapes. 11Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes
and pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup and placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand.”
12Then Joseph said to him, j “This is its interpretation: k the three branches
are three days. 13In three days Pharaoh will l lift up your head and restore
you to your office, and you shall place Pharaoh’s cup in his hand as
formerly, when you were his cupbearer.
14[†]Only remember me, when it is
well with you, and please do me the kindness to mention me to Pharaoh,
and so get me out of this house. 15For m I was indeed stolen out of the land
of the Hebrews, and n here also I have done nothing that they should put me
into the pit.”
16When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was favorable, he said
to Joseph, “I also had a dream: there were three cake baskets on my head,
17and in the uppermost basket there were all sorts of baked food for
Pharaoh, but the birds were eating it out of the basket on my head.”
18[†]And Joseph answered and said, o “This is its interpretation: the three
baskets are three days. 19 p In three days Pharaoh will lift up your head—
from you!—and q hang you on a tree. And the birds will eat the flesh from
you.”
20[†]On the third day, which was Pharaoh’s r birthday, he made a feast for
all his servants and s lifted up the head of the chief cupbearer and the head
of the chief baker among his servants. 21
t He restored the chief cupbearer to
his position, and u he placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand. 22But he v hanged
the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them. 23[†]Yet the chief
cupbearer did not remember Joseph, but forgot him.
Joseph Interprets Pharaoh’s Dreams