GENESIS 41 [†]After two whole years, Pharaoh dreamed that he was
standing by the Nile, 2and behold, there came up out of the Nile seven cows
attractive and plump, and they fed in the reed grass. 3And behold, seven
other cows, ugly and thin, came up out of the Nile after them, and stood by
the other cows on the bank of the Nile. 4And the ugly, thin cows ate up the
seven attractive, plump cows. And Pharaoh awoke. 5And he fell asleep and
dreamed a second time. And behold, seven ears of grain, plump and good,
were growing on one stalk. 6And behold, after them sprouted seven ears,
thin and w blighted by the east wind. 7And the thin ears swallowed up the
seven plump, full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and behold, it was a dream.
8[†]So in the morning x his spirit was troubled, and he sent and called for all
the y magicians of Egypt and all its wise men. Pharaoh told them his
dreams, but there was none who could interpret them to Pharaoh.
9Then the chief cupbearer said to Pharaoh, “I remember my offenses
today.
10When Pharaoh was z angry with his servants a and put me and the
chief baker in custody in the house of the captain of the guard, 11 b we
dreamed on the same night, he and I, each having a dream with its own
interpretation. 12[†]A young Hebrew was there with us, a servant of the
captain of the guard. When we told him, c he interpreted our dreams to us,
giving an interpretation to each man according to his dream. 13And d as he
interpreted to us, so it came about. I was restored to my office, and the
baker was hanged.”
14[†] e Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they f quickly brought
him g out of the pit. And when he had shaved himself and changed his
clothes, he came in before Pharaoh. 15[†]And Pharaoh said to Joseph, “I
have had a dream, and there is no one who can interpret it. h I have heard it
said of you that when you hear a dream you can interpret it.” 16Joseph
answered Pharaoh, i “It is not in me; j God will give Pharaoh a favorable
answer.” [1] 17[†]Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Behold, k in my dream I
was standing on the banks of the Nile. 18Seven cows, plump and attractive,
came up out of the Nile and fed in the reed grass. 19Seven other cows came
up after them, poor and very ugly and thin, such as I had never seen in all
the land of Egypt. 20And the thin, ugly cows ate up the first seven plump
cows, 21but when they had eaten them no one would have known that they
had eaten them, for they were still as ugly as at the beginning. Then I
awoke. 22I also saw in my dream seven ears growing on one stalk, full and
good. 23Seven ears, withered, thin, and blighted by the east wind, sprouted
after them, 24and the thin ears swallowed up the seven good ears. And l I
told it to the magicians, but there was no one who could explain it to me.”
25[†]Then Joseph said to Pharaoh, “The dreams of Pharaoh are one;
m God has revealed to Pharaoh what he is about to do. 26The seven good
cows are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years; the dreams
are one. 27The seven lean and ugly cows that came up after them are seven
years, and the seven empty ears blighted by the east wind are also n seven
years of famine. 28It is as I told Pharaoh; o God has shown to Pharaoh what
he is about to do. 29There will come p seven years of great plenty
throughout all the land of Egypt, 30but after them there will arise q seven
years of famine, and all the plenty will be forgotten in the land of Egypt.
r The famine will consume the land, 31and the plenty will be unknown in
the land by reason of the famine that will follow, for it will be very severe.
32And the doubling of Pharaoh’s dream means that the s thing is fixed by
God, and God will shortly bring it about. 33Now therefore let Pharaoh select
a discerning and wise man, and set him over the land of Egypt. 34Let
Pharaoh proceed to appoint overseers over the land and take one-fifth of the
produce of the land [2] of Egypt during the seven plentiful years. 35And t let
them gather all the food of these good years that are coming and store up
grain under the authority of Pharaoh for food in the cities, and let them keep
it. 36That food shall be a reserve for the land against the seven years of
famine that are to occur in the land of Egypt, so that the land may not perish
through the famine.”
Joseph Rises to Power
37This proposal pleased Pharaoh and all his servants. 38[†]And Pharaoh said
to his servants, “Can we find a man like this, u in whom is the Spirit of
God?” [3] 39Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Since God has shown you all
this, there is none so discerning and wise as you are. 40[†] v You shall be
over my house, and all my people shall order themselves as you
command. [4] Only as regards the throne will I be greater than you.” 41And
Pharaoh said to Joseph, “See, w I have set you over all the land of Egypt.”
42[†]Then Pharaoh x took his signet ring from his hand and put it on
Joseph’s hand, and y clothed him in garments of fine linen z and put a gold
chain about his neck. 43And he made him ride in his second chariot. a And
they called out before him, “Bow the knee!” [5] Thus he set him b over all
the land of Egypt. 44Moreover, Pharaoh said to Joseph, “I am Pharaoh, and
c without your consent no one shall lift up hand or foot in all the land of
Egypt.” 45[†]And Pharaoh called Joseph’s name Zaphenath-paneah. And he
gave him in marriage Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On. So
Joseph went out over the land of Egypt.
46Joseph was thirty years old when he d entered the service of Pharaoh
king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh and went
through all the land of Egypt. 47During the seven plentiful years the earth
produced abundantly,
48and he gathered up all the food of these seven years,
which occurred in the land of Egypt, and put the food in the cities. He put in
every city the food from the fields around it. 49And Joseph stored up grain
in great abundance, e like the sand of the sea, until he ceased to measure it,
for it could not be measured.
50[†]Before the year of famine came, f two sons were born to Joseph.
Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On, bore them to him. 51Joseph
called the name of the firstborn Manasseh. “For,” he said, “God has made
me forget all my hardship and all my father’s house.” [6] 52The name of the
second he called Ephraim, “For God has g made me fruitful in the land of
my affliction.” [7]
53The seven years of plenty that occurred in the land of Egypt came to an
end, 54[†]and h the seven years of famine began to come, i as Joseph had
said. There was famine in all lands, but in all the land of Egypt there was
bread. 55When all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to
Pharaoh for bread. Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, “Go to Joseph. What
he says to you, do.”
56So when the famine had spread over all the land, Joseph opened all the
storehouses [8] and j sold to the Egyptians, for the famine was severe in the
land of Egypt. 57Moreover, all the earth came to Egypt to Joseph to buy
grain, because the famine was severe k over all the earth.
Joseph’s Brothers Go to Egypt