HAGGAI 1 [†] a In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, on
the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came by the hand of
Haggai the prophet to b Zerubbabel the son of c Shealtiel, governor of
Judah, and to d Joshua the son of e Jehozadak, the high priest: 2[†]“Thus
says the LORD of hosts: These people say the time has not yet come to
rebuild the house of the LORD.” 3[†]Then the word of the LORD came f by
the hand of Haggai the prophet, 4[†] g “Is it a time for you yourselves to
dwell in your paneled houses, while h this house lies in ruins? 5Now,
therefore, thus says the LORD of hosts: i Consider your ways. 6[†] j You have
sown much, and harvested little. k You eat, but you never have enough; you
drink, but you never have your fill. You clothe yourselves, but no one is
warm. And he who l earns wages does so to put them into a bag with holes.
7“Thus says the LORD of hosts: i Consider your ways. 8Go up to the hills
and bring wood and build the house, that m I may take pleasure in it and that
n I may be glorified, says the LORD.
9[†] j You looked for much, and behold,
it came to little. And when you brought it home, o I blew it away. Why?
declares the LORD of hosts. Because of my house h that lies in ruins, while
each of you busies himself with his own house. 10[†]Therefore p the
heavens above you have withheld the dew, and the earth has withheld its
produce. 11And q I have called for a drought on the land and the hills, on
r the grain, the new wine, the oil, on what the ground brings forth, on man
and beast, and s on all their labors.”
The People Obey the LORD
12[†] t Then u Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and u Joshua the son of
Jehozadak, the high priest, with all v the remnant of the people, obeyed the
voice of the LORD their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet, as the
LORD their God had sent him. And the people feared the LORD.
13[†]Then
Haggai, the messenger of the LORD, spoke to the people with the LORD’s
message, w “I am with you, declares the LORD.” 14[†]And x the LORD stirred
up the spirit of u Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the
spirit of y Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of all
z the remnant of the people. And they came and a worked on the house of
the LORD of hosts, their God, 15[†] b on the twenty-fourth day of the month,
in the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.
The Coming Glory of the Temple
HAGGAI 2 c In the seventh month, on the twenty-first day of the month, the
word of the LORD came by the hand of Haggai the prophet, 2“Speak now to
d Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to d Joshua the
son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to all the remnant of the people, and
say,
3[†] e ‘Who is left among you who saw this house f in its former glory?
How do you see it now? g Is it not as nothing in your eyes? 4[†]Yet now
h be strong, O d Zerubbabel, declares the LORD. h Be strong, O d Joshua, son
of Jehozadak, the high priest. h Be strong, all you people of the land,
declares the LORD. i Work, for j I am with you, declares the LORD of hosts,
5[†] k according to the covenant that I made with you when you came out of
Egypt. l My Spirit remains in your midst. m Fear not. 6[†]For thus says the
LORD of hosts: n Yet once more, in a little while, o I will shake the heavens
and the earth and the sea and the dry land. 7[†]And I will shake all nations,
so that the treasures of all nations shall come in, and p I will fill this house
with glory, says the LORD of hosts. 8[†] q The silver is mine, and the gold is
mine, declares the LORD of hosts. 9[†] r The latter glory of this house shall
be greater than the former, says the LORD of hosts. And s in this place I will
give peace, declares the LORD of hosts.’”
Blessings for a Defiled People
10[†] t On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, u in the second year of
Darius, the word of the LORD came by Haggai the prophet, 11[†]“Thus says
the LORD of hosts: v Ask the priests about the law: 12‘If someone carries
w holy meat in the fold of his garment and touches with his fold bread or
stew or wine or oil or any kind of food, does it become holy?’” The priests
answered and said, x “No.” 13[†]Then Haggai said, y “If someone who is
unclean by contact with a dead body z touches any of these, does it become
unclean?” The priests answered and said, “It does become unclean.”
14[†]Then Haggai answered and said, a “So is it with this people, and with
this nation before me, declares the LORD, and so with every work of their
hands. And what they offer there is unclean. 15[†]Now then, b consider from
this day onward. [1] Before stone was placed upon stone in the temple of the
LORD,
16how did you fare? c When [2] one came to a heap of twenty
measures, there were but ten. When one came to the wine vat to draw fifty
measures, there were but twenty.
17[†] d I struck you and all the products of
your toil with blight and with mildew and with hail, e yet you did not turn to
me, declares the LORD.
18 b Consider from this day onward, f from the
twenty-fourth day of the ninth month. Since g the day that the foundation of
the LORD’s temple was laid, b consider: 19[†] h Is the seed yet in the barn?
Indeed, the vine, the fig tree, the pomegranate, and the olive tree have
yielded nothing. But from this day on i I will bless you.”
Zerubbabel Chosen as a Signet
20[†]The word of the LORD came a second time to Haggai f on the twenty-
fourth day of the month, 21[†]“Speak to j Zerubbabel, governor of Judah,
saying, k I am about to shake the heavens and the earth, 22[†]and l to
overthrow the throne of kingdoms. I am about to destroy the strength of the
kingdoms of the nations, and m overthrow the chariots and their riders. And
the horses and their riders shall go down, n every one by the sword of his
brother.
23[†]On that day, declares the LORD of hosts, I will take you, O
j Zerubbabel o my servant, the son of p Shealtiel, declares the LORD, and
make you q like a [3] signet ring, o for I have chosen you, declares the LORD
of hosts.”
Study Notes for Haggai
1:1–2 Introduction: Reluctant Rebuilders. The major problem that the
book addresses is that the temple is in ruins and the people are doing
nothing about it.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:1 second year . . . sixth month . . . first day. August
29, 520 B.C. It is three weeks after the anniversary of the destruction of the
first temple (2 Kings 25:8). Zerubbabel was heir to the Davidic throne and
governor of Judah (see Ezra 5:2). Joshua. High priest and son of
Jehozadak, whose line is traced through Zadok to Aaron (1 Chron. 6:11–15;
Zech. 3:1).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:2 LORD of hosts emphasizes the Lord’s universal rule
as leader of heavenly or earthly armies (see note on 1 Sam. 1:3).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:3–12 Consider Your Ways: Fruitless Prosperity.
In this second word to Haggai, the Lord asks his people to consider
whether their wealth brings satisfaction. He encourages them to supply
materials for “my house” (vv. 3–11). A general response follows (v. 12).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:4 paneled houses . . . ruins. The people focus on
comfortable personal dwellings (see v. 9) while the Lord remains
“homeless” (compare 2 Sam. 7:2).
FACT
The paneled houses described in 1:4 probably had walls and ceilings
covered with cedar wood. Such decoration was a sign of prosperity in a
land where wood was scarce. The people were spending freely on their
own homes while neglecting the rebuilding of the temple.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:6 sown much . . . harvested little. Because of their
preference for personal gain over temple rebuilding, God has not blessed
the people’s labors. eat . . . drink. . . . clothe. . . . earns wages. They need
to “consider their ways” (v. 5) because their self-focused efforts lead only to
frustration.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:9 busies himself with. The criticism of their misplaced
priorities, implied in v. 4, is now made clear.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:10–11 Therefore. . . . drought. There is a direct
connection between the ruin of the Lord’s house (vv. 4, 9) and the current
hardship.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:12 Convicted by the criticism of vv. 3–11, the people
respond fearfully. The remnant (v. 14; 2:2) is the same as the people
addressed in 1:2; 2:4, 14.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:13–15a Promise and Progress. The people’s
general response of fear (v. 12) prompts the prophet’s third statement.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:13–14 The words messenger, message, and worked
are a play on words in Hebrew. It shows the direct connection between the
messenger (Haggai), the content of his message (a statement of assurance),
and the desired effect upon the people (they resumed work on the temple).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:13 I am with you is the great promise of covenantal
assurance (compare 2:4; Num. 14:9; Josh. 14:12; Judg. 1:19; Isa. 43:5;
Matt. 28:20). The task before them will be undertaken with the promise of
God’s help.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:14 the LORD stirred up the spirit. Progress on the
house is made only as God awakens in the people an intense desire to work
at building it (compare Ex. 35:21, 26, 30–35). their God. The people claim
God as their own (compare Jer. 24:7; 31:33).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 1:15b–2:9 The Former and Latter Glory of This House.
Comparing the temple’s past glory with the present ruins brought
discouragement (2:1–3). In this fourth message the people are called to act
based on the past (2:4–5). As God moved Israel to build the tabernacle, so
he will now move among the nations to provide for the restoration of his
house (2:6–9).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:3 Who is left. Some of those who had returned from
exile could remember Solomon’s temple, which had been destroyed 66
years earlier (compare Ezra 3:12). Is it not as nothing in your eyes? The
people could see that the rebuilt temple would be far inferior to Solomon’s
temple.
FACT
The temple was the means through which God dwelt with his people in
meaningful fellowship (1:13; 2:4–5). It also brought glory and pleasure to
God (1:8). Jesus said that he was the final temple, restoring fellowship
once more between God and his people (John 2:19–22; Eph. 2:19–22).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:4 I am with you. As earlier, God’s presence forms the
basis for their ongoing work in the face of discouragement (compare 1:13–
14).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:5 The command Fear not is based on the assurance
that My Spirit remains in your midst. This is one of the strongest OT
statements of God’s ongoing presence among his people.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:6 LORD of hosts (five times in vv. 6–9) emphasizes the
Lord’s sovereign authority over all things.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:7 God promises to shake all nations so that they will
yield the treasures of all nations to adorn the temple. Ultimately, the Lord
will fill his house with glory—that is, with his own presence. Many see in
this oracle a foreshadowing of events related to the incarnation of Christ
(see John 2:20–21) and his second coming (see Rev. 21:22, 24).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:8 God ultimately owns all the wealth of all nations: the
silver is mine, and the gold is mine. Therefore it should be used in
obedience to him.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:9 The latter glory of this house. The rebuilt temple
was later expanded and made quite beautiful by Herod the Great (74–3
B.C.). He used Roman wealth to pay for this project (see vv. 7–8). The fact
that Jesus came to this temple also made its glory greater than that of
Solomon’s temple.
HAGGAI
When the people of God returned from their lengthy exile in Babylon,
Jerusalem was in ruins. Within a short time they laid the foundation for a
new temple, but they quickly grew discouraged and began focusing
instead on their own homes. By Haggai’s time, nearly 20 years later, the
temple was still unfinished. God used Haggai to encourage the people to
finish rebuilding the temple: “Is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in
your paneled houses, while this house lies in ruins?” (1:4). Haggai
encouraged the disheartened people of Judah with the message that the
God of Israel had not abandoned them. His Spirit was still in their midst,
and he would fulfill his promise to bless the whole world through them.
(Haggai 2:4–9)
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:10–19 Consider Your Ways: Holiness and Defilement;
Repentance and Blessing. In this fifth message, the Lord uses an analogy of
ritual holiness and uncleanness to force the priests to think about the
spiritual status of the people (vv. 10–14), about past agricultural failures
(vv. 15–17), and about their experience since temple restoration began (vv.
18–19).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:11 priests. Haggai directs questions to priests because
it is their duty to give a ruling in matters of Mosaic ritual and law (Lev.
10:10–11).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:13 dead body. One who has contact with a dead body
pollutes all that he contacts (Lev. 22:1–9).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:14 every work of their hands. All that they do is
unclean (compare v. 17). there. The temple. It is unclean because they
permit a “corpse” (the unfinished temple) to remain in their midst.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:15–17 The Lord calls the people to reflect upon their
economic situation prior to the start of reconstruction. The past lack of
agricultural prosperity did not lead to repentance.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:15 consider (literally, “set your hearts”; compare v. 18
[2x]). They should recall past experience, but also see what God is doing
now.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:17 I struck. A drastic action motivated by a Father’s
love for his children, to encourage them to repent (Deut. 30:1–10; Heb.
12:7–11). to me. Compare Amos 4:9.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:19 Is the seed yet in the barn? Although God’s
people had already planted their seeds, harvest is still months away. The
Lord promises that a plentiful harvest will come. This day is the day when
the Lord promised, I will bless you.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:20–23 Zerubbabel: The Signet Ring. The sixth and
final message from the Lord to Haggai complements the previous word and
comes on the same day (vv. 10, 18, 20). It is a vision of trembling creation,
overthrown kingdoms, and perishing armies. Ultimately, the vision focuses
upon the actions of the divine King. He wears, as a signet ring, the promise
of David’s house restored in the person of Zerubbabel.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:21 The sovereign Lord warns of a coming destruction
of nations. shake. Earlier this was for the purpose of gathering the wealth of
the nations (vv. 6–7), while here it is tied to the impending destruction of
the nations.
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:22 chariots . . . riders. . . . go down. An allusion to
the destruction of Pharaoh’s army (Ex. 14:22–29).
HAGGAI—NOTE ON 2:23 On that day. This phrase, common in prophetic
writings, sets the Lord’s actions in an unspecified future, that is, “the day of
the LORD” (Isa. 2:11–20; see note on Amos 5:18–20; see also The Day of
the Lord in the Prophets). I will take. The Lord’s actions are underscored
by repeating three times declares the LORD [of hosts]. my servant. A title
given to individuals selected to accomplish God’s appointed task. It is
particularly associated with David or an ideal Davidic king (2 Sam. 3:18;
Ps. 89:3; Ezek. 34:23–24). signet ring. A ring that provided evidence of
royal authority and ownership. God’s promise to bless his people and the
whole world through the house of David still stands (see Matt. 1:1).
Z e c h a r i a h
(return to table of contents)
Zechariah 1 • Zechariah 2 • Zechariah 3 • Zechariah 4 • Zechariah 5
•
Zechariah 6 • Zechariah 7 • Zechariah 8 • Zechariah 9 • Zechariah 10
Zechariah 11 • Zechariah 12 • Zechariah 13 • Zechariah 14
•
Introduction to Zechariah
Timeline
Author and Date
Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Near East at the Time of Zechariah
Global Message of Zechariah
Zechariah in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Zechariah
The Global Message of Zechariah for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Zechariah
Introduction to Zechariah
Timeline
Author and Date
Zechariah was a prophet and a priest. He began his ministry in 520 B.C., shortly
after Haggai had begun his prophetic work.
Background
Nearly 20 years after returning from the Babylonian exile in the time of Cyrus
(538 B.C.), God’s people were discouraged. The foundation of the temple had
been laid shortly after the initial return, in 536 B.C., but powerful opposition
had prevented any further progress on rebuilding the temple. And, there was
little evidence of the kind of spiritual renewal that the earlier prophets had
anticipated. Jewish sovereignty had not been restored. A moral reformation of
the people had not occurred. Jerusalem was still only partially rebuilt and had
no significance among the surrounding nations. Under the circumstances, many
people concluded that theirs was a “day of small things” (4:10) in which God
was absent from his people. Many viewed faithful obedience as useless. It
seemed to make more sense to forget God and to pursue the best life possible.
Key Themes
1. The need for turning to the Lord in repentance (1:1–6) and serving him
with sincerity (ch. 7).
2. The Lord’s concern and care for his people’s difficulties (1:8–17; 4:10).
3. Jerusalem’s future expansion and blessing (2:4, 12; 8:1–8; 14:16).
4. The complete and permanent removal of the people’s sin (chs. 3; 5), and
the removal of false prophecy and idolatry from the land (13:2–6).
5. The importance of the temple as the source of God’s blessing (ch. 4).
6. The Lord’s wrath at the nations that plundered Judah and Jerusalem
(1:18–21; 14:3–5).
7. The Divine Warrior’s return to terrorize Israel’s foes (9:1–8), and the
coming of the Branch, a Davidic ruler who will save his people, cleanse
their sins, and establish peace (3:8; 6:9–15; 9:9–10).
8. The pouring out of God’s Spirit, resulting in repentance and the opening
of a fountain for the cleansing of sin (12:10–13:1).
9. Judgment on the wicked shepherds of God’s people and their replacement
by a good shepherd (11:1–17).
10. The striking of the good shepherd and the scattering of the flock (13:7–9).
11. The Lord’s final triumph over the nations (ch. 14).
Outline
I. Oracles and Visions (1:1–8:23)
A. Introduction: return to me and I will return to you (1:1–6)
B. Eight night visions and a sign-act (1:7–6:15)
C. From fasts to feasts (7:1–8:23)
II. The Return of the King (9:1–14:21)
A. The first oracle: leaders and their people (9:1–11:17)
B. The second oracle: the people and their leaders (12:1–14:21)
The Near East at the Time of Zechariah
c. 520 B.C.
Zechariah prophesied to the people of Judah soon after they had returned
from exile in Babylon. Several years earlier, in 539 B.C., Cyrus the Great had
conquered Babylon and absorbed its territory into his empire. A year later he
permitted the people of Judah to return to their homeland and rebuild the
temple. Cyrus and his son Cambyses extended the Persian Empire until it
stretched from Egypt and Lydia to the borders of India.
The Global Message of Zechariah
“Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion, for behold, I come and I will dwell
in your midst, declares the LORD. And many nations shall join themselves to
the LORD in that day, and shall be my people” (Zech. 2:10–11). The global
message of Zechariah is that through the judgment that is justly coming
upon God’s enemies, God is nevertheless gathering a people for himself
from all the nations of the world—all made possible through the work of a
righteous priest-king, Jesus Christ.
Zechariah in Redemptive History
Israel’ s calling squandered. Although Israel had been called out to be a
light to the nations of the earth, the people had failed miserably in that
calling. Yet this failure was not the last word over their destiny. “As you
have been a byword of cursing among the nations, O house of Judah and
house of Israel, so will I save you, and you shall be a blessing” (Zech.
8:13). Indeed, not only was God going to fulfill his promise that Israel
would be a blessing to the world, but God was also going to restore the
flourishing abundance of Eden (8:11–12). Yet this restoration would be
extended not only to Israel but to all the nations of the world, as originally
intended in the mandate given to Abraham (Gen. 12:1–3). As Zechariah’s
prophecy puts it, “the LORD has an eye on mankind and on all the tribes of
Israel” (Zech. 9:1).
Israel’ s calling fulfilled. How would this redemption of the world be
achieved? Only through the work of Christ. In Christ, the temple, the place
where God dwelt with his people, is rebuilt as promised (Zech. 1:16).
Zechariah’s prophecy is filled with strange and wonderful hints of the
coming global king who will achieve salvation for his own. We read of
Joshua being clothed with clean garments amid Satan’s accusations (3:1–5).
We hear a prophetic word of a “Branch,” a priest-king who will build the
temple of the Lord (6:12–13; compare Jer. 23:5–6; 33:14–16; John 2:19–
22). We read of a righteous and humble king, riding on a donkey (Zech. 9:9;
compare Matt. 21:5; John 12:15), as well as of the piercing of one who is
like an only child (Zech. 12:10; compare John 19:37) and of the scattering
of the sheep when the shepherd is struck (Zech. 13:7; compare Matt. 26:31).
We read of “living waters” flowing out from Jerusalem (Zech. 14:8;
compare John 7:37–39).
The result of the work of this coming king is that humanity will be
restored to its Creator, coming to him from every corner of the earth:
Thus says the LORD of hosts: Peoples shall yet come, even the
inhabitants of many cities. The inhabitants of one city shall go to
another, saying, “Let us go at once to entreat the favor of the LORD and
to seek the LORD of hosts; I myself am going.” Many peoples and
strong nations shall come to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem and
to entreat the favor of the LORD. Thus says the LORD of hosts: In those
days ten men from the nations of every tongue shall take hold of the
robe of a Jew, saying, “Let us go with you, for we have heard that God
is with you.” (Zech. 8:20–23)
Universal Themes in Zechariah
Worldwide salvation. “Behold, your king is coming to you; righteous and
having salvation is he, humble and mounted on a donkey, on a colt, the foal
of a donkey. . . . And he shall speak peace to the nations; his rule shall be
from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth” (Zech. 9:9–10).
Zechariah’s prophecy presents a vision of a globally minded God on a
mission to restore the world to the way it was originally created to be. This
includes welcoming in people from all the tribes and nations and people
groups of the world. Such worldwide salvation is also the note on which the
prophecy ends (14:16–19).
Joy in God’ s redemption. Time and again throughout Zechariah we see
the joy that comes with God’s merciful redemption of his people. The fasts
that will be celebrated at the time of Zion’s coming restoration will be
“seasons of joy and gladness and cheerful feasts” (Zech. 8:19). Amid
judgments on Israel’s enemies, to Israel herself God says, “Rejoice greatly,
O daughter of Zion!” (9:9). When God visits his people to restore them to
himself, “their hearts shall be glad as with wine. Their children shall see it
and be glad; their hearts shall rejoice in the LORD” (10:7). A crucial
common denominator to the salvation God grants in Christ, regardless of
geographical location, is joy. Of all people, the redeemed supremely have
reason to rejoice.
The importance of godly leadership. Throughout Zechariah we see the
metaphor of “shepherd” applied to those who lead God’s people—more
often than in any other prophet (Zech. 10:2; 11:4, 7, 9, 15, 16, 17; 13:7).
“The people wander like sheep; they are afflicted for lack of a shepherd”
(10:2). God’s people throughout the world require strong, godly leadership
from those who are called to lead them—the testimony of biblical history is
that, as go the leaders, so go the people. Ultimately, Jesus himself is the
global church’s Shepherd, laying down his life on behalf of the sheep (John
10:11; 1 Pet. 2:25; 5:4).
The Global Message of Zechariah for Today
The supremacy of Christ. As is true of every part of Scripture, Zechariah’s
prophecy tells us of Christ and the great redemption God has won for us
through him. And Zechariah is filled with an unusually high number of
striking promises that are ultimately fulfilled in Jesus. As believers around
the world read Zechariah, we commune with God and are given glimpses of
the mighty friend we have in his Son, Jesus Christ. Amid the many diverse
kinds of adversity facing Christians today, Jesus himself, whose very heart
is “gentle and lowly” (Matt. 11:29), walks with his brothers and sisters. Our
fellowship with him cannot be broken, and it transcends the many cultural
differences that distinguish believers around the world.
Compassion for the needy. In the meantime, as we await Christ’s second
coming in great power and glory, Zechariah reminds us to extend
compassion to the needy and oppressed around the world even as Christ has
extended compassion to us. God’s heart for the socially disadvantaged
shines through in Zechariah, as in so many of the prophets. It is a message
strongly relevant to twenty-first century global Christianity. “And the word
of the LORD came to Zechariah, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts,
Render true judgments, show kindness and mercy to one another, do not
oppress the widow, the fatherless, the sojourner, or the poor’” (Zech. 7:8–
10; compare 8:16–17).
A Call to Return to the LORD