HOSEA 14 [†] n Return, O Israel, to the LORD your God,
for o you have stumbled because of your iniquity.
2[†] Take with you words
and return to the LORD;
say to him,
“Take away all iniquity;
accept p what is good,
and we will pay with bulls
q the vows [1] of our lips.
3
r Assyria shall not save us;
s we will not ride on horses;
and t we will say no more, ‘Our God,’
to the work of our hands.
u In you the orphan finds mercy.”
4[†] I v will heal their apostasy;
w I will love them freely,
for my anger has turned from them.
5[†] x I will be like the dew to Israel;
y he shall blossom like the lily;
he shall take root like the trees z of Lebanon;
6[†] his shoots shall spread out;
his beauty shall be a like the olive,
and his fragrance like Lebanon.
7[†] They shall return and b dwell beneath my [2] shadow;
they shall flourish like the grain;
they shall blossom like the vine;
their fame shall be like the wine of Lebanon.
8 O c Ephraim, what have I to do with idols?
It is I who answer and look after you. [3]
I am like an evergreen cypress;
d from me comes your fruit.
9[†] e Whoever is wise, let him understand these things;
whoever is discerning, let him know them;
for the ways of the LORD are right,
and f the upright walk in them,
f but transgressors stumble in them.
Study Notes for Hosea
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:1–3:5 Biographical: Hosea’ s Family. The
unfaithfulness of Hosea’s wife, Gomer, and her eventual restoration to
him, are a parable for the Lord’s relationship to Israel.
FACT
Hosea comes from the same verb as “Joshua” and “Jesus,” meaning “to
save" or "to deliver.” The message of the Bible is one of salvation for
people of all different ethnicities and backgrounds all around the globe.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:1 The name Hosea comes from the same verb as
“Joshua” and “Jesus,” meaning “to save or deliver.”
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:2 take to yourself a wife of whoredom. The word
translated “whoredom” throughout the book describes various kinds of
sexual misconduct. In Hosea it generally refers to a married woman being
unfaithful to her husband, which is why it provides a picture of Israel’s
unfaithfulness to the Lord, her husband (compare 2:5). The tragedy of
Hosea is the tragedy of a marriage that began well but went bad. And so it
was with the Lord and Israel.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:3–9 Hosea’s wife bears children, and God gives them
prophetic names. The text suggests that Hosea was in fact the father of
Gomer’s first child (bore him, v. 3).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:4 Jeroboam II (v. 1) was the fourth king of the dynasty
begun by Jehu in 841 B.C. The house of Jehu is probably parallel to house
of Israel. This would mean that the blood of Jezreel refers to the events of
1 Kings 21: Ahab permitted the murder of Naboth, a man loyal to the Lord,
in order to take his vineyard in Jezreel. Thus, this verse introduces the
ongoing confrontation between Baal and the God of Israel in the rest of the
book.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:6 The name of Gomer’s second child, No Mercy,
probably means that Hosea denies that he is the father. Hosea does not have
the affection that a father would have for his own children.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:8–9 The birth and naming of another child by Gomer
reinforces what was seen with No Mercy’s birth. Not My People means he
is not Hosea’s son. for you are not my people, and I am not your God.
The name symbolizes a breaking of the marital bond that God had made
with Israel at Sinai (Ex. 6:7; Lev. 26:12).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:10 God intends to restore his people, based on the
promises of the Abrahamic covenant: the number of the children of Israel
shall be like the sand of the sea (Gen. 22:17; 32:12). Israel’s salvation
must be gained just as Abraham’s was: salvation by grace through faith and
not by works of the law (Gen. 15:6; Rom. 4:1–3).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 1:11 the children of Judah and the children of Israel
shall be gathered together. The hostility between Judah (the southern
kingdom) and Israel (the northern kingdom) had a long history, beginning
in 1 Kings 12:16–24.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:1–13 Hosea uses the legal process of an offended
husband against his wife as a picture of God’s plans for dealing with Israel’s
rebellion.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:1 Hosea hopes the Israelites will respond to the promise
contained in this verse. The verse begins with a command (Say to your
brothers), as does the following verse. Both serve as a motivation for Israel
to return to her God. Israel can look forward to receiving a new name: no
longer will they be “No Mercy” and “Not My People.”
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:2 Perhaps the declaration that she is not my wife, and I
am not her husband should be read as a threat, rather than an actual
divorce. Otherwise, Hosea would have no right to issue the warnings and
threats that follow. The marriage between God and Israel has not ended.
The covenant made with Israel contains a way for Israel to be restored. She
only needs to put away her whoring from her face, and her adultery
from between her breasts.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:4–5 they are children of whoredom. Here is a clear
rejection of fatherhood. The Lord, like Hosea, is as a husband wronged and
injured by infidelity.
FACT
Public humiliation was a standard punishment for adultery in the ancient
world (2:3). Rather than follow that custom, however, Hosea sought to
reclaim his wife. This is a picture of the Lord, who seeks to reclaim his
people even when they forsake him.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:6 Therefore. This is the first of three “therefores” in
this chapter (see vv. 9, 14). It is spoken in response to the mother’s
uncontained lust. The eighth-century prophets (including Hosea) truly
believed that Israel’s sins could be forgiven and the nation could be
restored.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:8 she did not know. Israel’s failure to “know” the Lord
is a key idea in the book (vv. 8; 4:1, 6; 5:4; 6:3; 8:2; 13:4, 5). that it was I
who gave. Israel’s prosperity was a gift from the Lord, not from Baal.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:14–23 Hosea describes God’s plan to restore his
“marriage” with Israel.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:14 With this third therefore (compare vv. 6, 9), it
becomes clear that the reason Israel is punished is to bring her to
repentance. allure . . . speak tenderly. The Lord will woo his estranged
wife away from her adulterous lovers with the language of courtship (Ruth
2:13; Isa. 40:2).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:15 The Valley of Achor, where Achan was cursed (Josh.
7:25–26), will become a place for hope.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:16–17 you will call me “My Husband,” and no longer
will you call me “My Baal.
” The Hebrew word for “Baal” and one of the
words for “husband” are virtually the same. Israel treated Baal (their false
god) as if he were God (their covenant husband). In the future, they will
know their true God.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:19 I will betroth you to me. The marriage agreement is
established by paying a bride price to the bride’s father (2 Sam. 3:14). The
bride price that the Lord will pay for Israel is righteousness, justice,
steadfast love, and mercy. Only the Lord can offer such things (Ex. 34:6–
7).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 2:21–23 And in that day, that is, when the marriage is
again consummated, Israel’s former difficulties will be reversed: grain,
wine, and oil will be replenished (compare vv. 5, 8–9). No Mercy will
receive mercy (compare 1:6; 2:4), and Not My People will again be God’s
people (compare 1:9).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 3:1–5 Hosea returns to his marriage, which is still an
image for God and Israel. Israel’s hope, like Judah’s, lies with the house of
David.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 3:1 Though the name of this woman is not stated, she is
Gomer, Hosea’s wife. It is Israel, the adulteress, that the Lord pursues, not
another people. Hosea is to retrieve his adulterous wife so that Israel will
clearly know that the Lord still loves her, his spiritually unfaithful wife.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 3:2 Bought her probably means that Hosea redeemed
Gomer from slavery, though the exact custom is unknown.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 3:3–4 You must dwell as mine has the force of a
command. The separation of Gomer/Israel will lead to her purification,
rededication, and renewal. This separation will mean giving up those things
that led to Israel’s spiritual unfaithfulness: king and prince, who failed in
keeping Israel faithful to the Lord (see 1:4; 8:4); sacrifice, which they
offered to the Baals (see 11:2; 13:1–2); the cult pillar (see 10:2), popular in
Canaanite religion; the ephod, which was improperly used as a tool for
magical ceremonies; and household gods, idols prohibited from Israel’s
religion (Judg. 17:5; 2 Kings 23:24; Zech. 10:2). The Lord’s removing these
things, far from being incompatible with his love, is a major aspect of it.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 3:5 To call David their king is significant for the northern
kingdom, which has been rebelling against the house of David for two
centuries. They must return in order to be full participants in God’s
covenant with David (2 Sam. 7:8–16). It is from the house of David that the
ultimate king for God’s people will come, as indicated by the term the
latter days (see Isa. 2:2). God has a glorious future in store for his people.
HOSEA
Hosea ministered to the northern kingdom of Israel during the latter half
of the eighth century B.C., the most difficult time the nation had ever
faced. Israel had forsaken the Lord and was worshiping Baal instead.
Hosea understood that this was why the Lord intended to judge the
nation. God commanded Hosea to marry, but warned him that his wife
would be unfaithful to him. Hosea married Gomer, who indeed became
unfaithful to him. When Gomer left Hosea, God instructed him to reclaim
her. This would be a sign to the people that, though their sins were
shameful, the Lord still loved Israel, his spiritually unfaithful wife.
Hosea’s marriage to Gomer, her unfaithfulness, and their eventual
restoration were thus a parable of the Lord’s relationship to Israel.
(Hosea 3:1–5)
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:1–14:9 Accusations, Warnings, and Promises for Israel.
In the rest of the book, Hosea details the aspects of Israel’s life that show
her unfaithfulness to the Lord, urges her to repent, and reveals God’s
commitment to his people, despite their unfaithfulness.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:1–19 The Lord continues to prosecute his case against
unfaithful Israel.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:1–2 The Lord’s charges against Israel are presented in
the vocabulary of a lawsuit (a controversy), a setting used by other eighth-
century biblical prophets (compare Isa. 3:13–15; Mic. 6:2). The charges are
offenses against God’s law, particularly violations of the Ten
Commandments. Faithfulness and steadfast love are attributes of God in
Ex. 34:6. Genuine knowledge of God in the hearts of his people will
produce a character like his.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:5 Your mother is a reference to Israel (2:4–5). Hosea’s
symbols of Israel include a mother, children, and a bride.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:6 The people are the focal point in this chapter (see vv.
1, 12, 15). God refers to them as “my people” throughout (vv. 8, 12). The
priests were responsible for teaching the people God’s laws (see Lev. 10:11;
Mal. 2:6–7), but they had failed miserably. As a result, the people lacked
knowledge of God’s laws and his ways.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:10–11 they shall play the whore. By worshiping Baal.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:12–13 These verses describe breaking God’s laws by
following Canaanite religious practices. inquire of a piece of wood. They
would ask for guidance from an idol carved out of wood. led them astray.
Like sheep following a wicked shepherd. Therefore your daughters play
the whore. There is a connection between following a false religion (which
is spiritual adultery, vv. 12–13a) and the immoral conduct (physical
adultery) of the next generation (“Therefore,” v. 13b; compare v. 6). The
parents turned away from God, and as a consequence he allowed their
daughters and other young women (your brides) to stray into sexual
immorality.
FACT
The piece of wood mentioned in 4:12 refers to the wooden idols
worshiped by Canaanites. God’s people had sunk so low that they would
even “inquire of a piece of wood” rather than seek guidance from the
Lord.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:14 I will not punish your daughters. Perhaps spoken
in sarcasm, as if to say, how can anyone blame them when the whole people
is unfaithful? sacrifice with cult prostitutes. An unfaithful spouse is
grouped alongside those who participate in sexual activity at pagan places
of worship.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 4:15 Judah is warned not to follow Israel’s example,
though eventually Judah did. Several shrines that might entice Judah are
named.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 5:1–14 Israel’s rulers have led the way into unfaithfulness.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 5:1 Hear this, O priests . . . O house of Israel . . . O
house of the king. Both royal and religious leaders are addressed. Mizpah
in Gilead and Tabor, a mountain in the Valley of Jezreel, marked high
points in Israel’s past. Mizpah was the home of Jephthah (Judg. 10:17;
11:33), and Tabor was the scene of Barak’s victory (Judg. 4:14). These
revered sites became a net spread upon Tabor. The image of a net, a device
used for catching birds, depicts the Israelites as the prey of priests and
royalty.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 5:10 like those who move the landmark. To move a
neighbor’s boundary marker is forbidden (Deut. 19:14; 27:17). Land-
grabbing violates God’s intention that all the people are to enjoy the land he
gave them, and it creates a wealthy, power-abusing class. my wrath like
water. The word for “wrath” suggests the image of overflowing fury
(compare Isa. 14:6).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 5:13 When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his
wound. Using physical infirmities to describe spiritual corruption is
common in the OT prophets. Notice how frequently Hosea links
Israel/Ephraim and Judah: 1:11; 4:15; 5:12–14; 6:4; 8:14; 10:11; 11:12.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 5:15–6:3 The Lord will “return” to his place, expecting
the people to “return” to him.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 6:2 After two days he will revive us. Even after the
punishment described in v. 1, the Lord can heal his people. on the third
day he will raise us up. Hosea is not writing specifically about Jesus here,
but this picture of Israel’s death and resurrection sets the pattern for what
eventually will be accomplished in and through Christ (compare Luke
24:46).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 6:4–7:3 Israel’s sins are worse than simply violating the
law: they repudiate the gracious covenant that is the foundation of their life
and hope.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 6:5 my judgment goes forth as the light. God’s light
exposes Israel’s idolatry.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 6:6 Rather than burnt offerings, God desires real
participation in the covenant by his people, here expressed as steadfast love
and knowledge of God (see note on Amos 4:4–5).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 6:7 But like Adam they transgressed the covenant.
“Covenant” appears four other times in Hosea (2:18; 8:1; 10:4; 12:1). Twice
it refers to breaking a covenant (6:7; 8:1). Israel is like Adam, who
disobeyed God (Gen. 2:16–17; 3:17).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 7:2–3 The actions described in ch. 7 illustrate that Israel
shows no sorrow for their sin. By their evil they make the king glad
describes acts that please royalty, perhaps by assassinating potential rivals.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 7:4–16 Hosea compares Israel to an oven (vv. 4–7), a
half-baked cake (vv. 8–10), a silly dove (vv. 11–12), and a treacherous bow
(vv. 13–16), thus describing their passion for evil, their foolishness, and
their uselessness.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 7:4–7 These verses compare adulterers with an oven. In
v. 4, the heated oven represents a quiet passion that does not go out even
though the baker ceases to stir the fire. In v. 6, the oven is a restrained
passion that unexpectedly and violently erupts; it blazes like a flaming
fire. In v. 7, the oven represents a consuming passion that will devour . . .
rulers and all their kings. This may refer to the assassinations of four of
the last six Israelite kings.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 7:8 mixes himself with the peoples. Israel’s spiritual
unfaithfulness has made it no different from the pagan nations. a cake not
turned. That is, half-baked, not fit for eating.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 7:14–15 gash themselves. Probably to call on Baal (see 1
Kings 18:28).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 7:16 Egypt here represents all foreign powers but refers
specifically to Israel’s time of slavery in Egypt (Exodus 1–12). Like other
historical references in Hosea, the name mourns the reversal of Israel’s
fortunes.
FACT
To describe the Israelites as a treacherous bow (7:16) means that they
were undependable and even dangerous to those who relied on them. If a
bow was improperly stored when not in use, the dry Mediterranean heat
would make it brittle, causing it to snap and injure its user.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 8:1–14 The people of Israel may claim to know and love
the Lord, but their deeds prove otherwise.
FACT
Worship God alone! Worship of the calf idol (8:6) violated the First and
Second Commandments: “You shall have no other gods before me,” and
“You shall not make . . . a carved image . . .” (Ex. 20:3–6). Believers are
to worship the Creator God, rather than created things.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 8:1 The trumpet is a bugle used to alert the community to
danger and summon it to religious festivals. The vulture is a symbol of an
aggressor, possibly the Assyrians. House of the LORD probably refers here
to the Lord’s land (compare 9:4, 15).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 8:2 Chapter 8 is a response to Israel’s cry. It is untrue for
the people of Israel to say they know God (see 2:8; 5:4; 11:3). What follows
are accusations that expose Israel’s idolatry, corrupt politics, and false
worship.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 8:4 kings . . . princes. The leaders are not the Lord’s
choice, and these rulers are not godly. I knew it not. The people had never
asked God for guidance before choosing these leaders.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 8:5–6 I have spurned your calf, O Samaria. These
verses respond to v. 3, “Israel has spurned the good.” As the calf-idol in
Aaron’s day was pulverized, so this idol shall be broken to pieces
(compare also 2 Kings 23:15).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:1–9 God will punish Israel by sending her people away
from the land, to a place where they will not be able to make offerings to
the Lord.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:3 The failure of crops is not the only outcome of
Ephraim’s spiritual adultery; exile from the land is another consequence.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:6 they are going away from destruction. They think
they are safe, but Egypt shall gather them. Other disasters are described in
the rest of the verse.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:9 As in the days of Gibeah refers to the events in
Judges 19–21, where God brings judgment on Gibeah and the tribe of
Benjamin (Judg. 20:35) for their cruel violence (Judg. 19:22–26; compare
Hos. 10:9).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:10–11:11 Hosea uses four more comparisons to describe
Israel: grapes in the wilderness (9:10–17), a luxuriant vine (10:1–10), a
trained calf (10:11–15), and a toddler (11:1–11), all of which stress God’s
past care for them, their reckless ingratitude, and the unavoidable
consequences.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:10 Like grapes in the wilderness. . . . Like the first
fruit on the fig tree. The unexpected discovery of grapes in the desert or
the first figs of the season is delightful. I saw your fathers. Another
reference to the nation’s early history. But like Hosea’s marriage, that
cherished relationship lasted for only a short time. they came to Baal-peor
(see Num. 25:3; compare Ps. 106:28).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:14 A miscarrying womb would be the opposite of the
fruitfulness the people sought in Baal worship.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 9:17 wanderers among the nations. They will be exiles.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 10:1–2 For the image of Israel as a vine, see Ps. 80:8–16;
Jer. 2:21; Ezek. 15:1–8; 17:1–10. The more his fruit increased, the more
altars he built. That is, altars to Baal: the more Israel prospered, the more
they sinned. It was just as Moses had warned (Deut. 8:11–14).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 10:9 the days of Gibeah. See note on 9:9. Israel is in
much more trouble now than when the Benjaminites were punished at
Gibeah.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 10:10 When I please, I will discipline them. Israel’s
discipline and downfall comes from the Lord. To do this, God uses the
nations that shall be gathered against them (see Isa. 10:5–6).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 10:11–13 Ephraim was a trained calf is another
reference to Israel’s beginnings. Israel once loved to thresh in his field (see
Deut. 25:4). But now the Israelites have plowed iniquity . . . reaped
injustice. Therefore, the Lord must harness Ephraim so that she will sow
the seeds of righteousness and plow and reap a crop of steadfast love
(compare Hos. 8:7). Ignoring the prophet’s appeals will result in a military
disaster.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 11:1 When Israel was a child, I loved him, and out of
Egypt I called my son (see Ex. 4:22–23). Matthew 2:15 quotes this verse
to show that Jesus is the “Son” of God, the heir of David who embodies
Israel’s relationship to God (compare 2 Sam. 7:14; Ps. 89:26–27). Hosea
portrays the Lord not only as a husband but also as a father (compare Luke
15:11–32).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 11:2–4 The Lord never stopped loving Israel. Throughout
their history, he taught Ephraim (that is, Israel) to walk, and he healed
them, as a father does with his child. led them with cords of kindness,
with the bands of love. Many commentators think that in v. 4 the image
changes to that of a kind farmer with his animals. He removes the yoke and
leads the animal, not with harsh ropes (as in 10:11), but with light “cords”
and “bands” to guide the animals to their food. Then the Lord, like a gentle
farmer, even bent down and fed them. These kind acts provide the basis
for a relationship of care, guidance, and obedience. Tragically, the Lord’s
love was rejected: The more they were called, the more they went away.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 11:5–7 They shall not return . . . but Assyria. An
alliance with Egypt will not save them from Assyria.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 11:8 How can I give you up? The Lord expresses his
unfailing love (compare Isa. 49:15; Jer. 31:20). The Lord is filled with
compassion, unlike the lifeless Baals. His affection is stronger than Israel’s
ingratitude. He cannot bring himself to reject his people, even though they
refuse him.
FACT
Admah and Zeboiim were destroyed along with Sodom and Gomorrah
(Genesis 18–19; see Deut. 29:23). Though God’s rebellious people often
deserve the same fate, his compassion restrains him from destroying
them (Hos. 11:8).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 11:10–11 His children shall come trembling . . . I will
return them to their homes describes the return of a remnant of God’s
people from exile.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 11:12–12:1 Ephraim has surrounded me with lies . . .
but Judah still walks with God (11:12). Both Judah and the northern
tribes (Ephraim) suffered lapses in fidelity to the Lord, but Judah, unlike
Ephraim, had some good kings (in particular, Hezekiah). One of the highest
points in Judah’s history was the victory over the Assyrians when Hezekiah
was king (see 2 Kings 18–19, which was 20 years after the northern
kingdom fell).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 12:2–14 Hosea recounts incidents from Israel’s past in
order to display the Lord’s enduring kindness and Israel’s stubborn
ingratitude.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 12:3–4 He strove with the angel and prevailed at Peniel
(Gen. 32:24–31). There the angel touched Jacob’s hip socket and put it out
of joint. That divine wounding made Jacob into a new man, Israel.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 12:5–8 Hosea again reminds Israel of their spiritual
heritage. memorial name. See Ex. 3:15. God’s choosing of Israel is the
reason Israel can now return and show love and justice to one another. But
Israel’s deeds and words (Hos. 12:7–8) reveal they refuse to hold fast and
wait continually for their God (v. 6).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 13:1–8 The man-made gods that Israel worships are
nothing compared to their actual God, who is living, active, and true to his
word.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 13:2 who offer human sacrifice. Child sacrifice was part
of Baal worship (Isa. 57:5). kiss calves. Kissing is a way of showing
submission (1 Kings 19:18). Calf worship was a problem throughout the
history of Israel (see Exodus 32; 1 Kings 12).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 13:4–5 But I am the LORD your God from the land of
Egypt. This is a solemn statement that recalls Ex. 20:2. The passing work
of the craftsmen who make idols (Hos. 13:2) is contrasted with the God
who sustained Israel in the land of drought by his devoted care.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 13:7–8 lion . . . leopard . . . bear. Images of judgment
(see 5:14; Amos 3:12).
FACT
The leopards found in Israel (13:7) were probably Arabian leopards,
which weighed only 50 to 60 pounds (23 to 27 kg). They were solitary
hunters, eating mostly rabbits, lizards, and occasionally gazelles. Today,
there are probably only a few dozen leopards inhabiting the desert
regions of Israel.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 13:9–16 Ephraim, by its stubborn refusal to return to the
Lord, rejects the only hope that God offers. Three figures of judgment are
pronounced in these verses: the incompetent king (vv. 10–11), the unborn
child (vv. 13–14), and the withering wind of God (v. 15).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 13:12–13 The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin
is kept in store probably suggests that Ephraim holds on to its sins and will
not ask the Lord to forgive them. he does not present himself. Ephraim, in
its refusal to repent and be healed, is likened to a baby who refuses to be
born—which would be most unwise, since it would be fatal.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 13:14 Shall I ransom them from the power of Sheol? In
the OT, “Sheol” is a proper name and can be a metaphor for the grave (e.g.,
1 Kings 2:6; Ps. 141:7). It can also represent the wicked person’s grim
destination after death (see Ps. 49:14–15). The parallel wording with Ps.
49:15 suggests that Hosea sees Ephraim’s “death” as leading to Sheol in the
second sense of separation from God. Thus God asks himself whether he
should rescue Ephraim from such consequences. O Death, where are your
plagues? If the Lord is their strong deliverer, then not even death will be
able to terrify them or harm them. In 1 Cor. 15:55 Paul cites part of Hos.
13:14. He views the general resurrection as God’s triumph over bodily
death and eternal judgment for the faithful. Sadly, in Hosea’s time Israel
rejects the only power that can save her. Thus compassion is hidden from
God’s eyes, and Israel faces destruction (vv. 15–16).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 14:1–9 Hosea finishes his book with a series of moving
appeals to the wayward northern kingdom to return to the Lord and find
healing and covenant renewal.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 14:2–3 Take with you words means to know ahead of
time what you will say. Hosea then gives the words of confession the
people should use before the Lord (vv. 2b–3). These verses include
covenant terms that express God’s grace and the people’s gratitude. Take
away all iniquity recalls Ex. 34:7 (“forgiving”; compare Ps. 32:5). Pay
with bulls the vows of our lips probably describes peace offerings (see Ex.
24:5; Num. 7:88), in which the grateful worshiper enjoys a meal in God’s
presence. This is what Israel can expect if they return to the LORD.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 14:4 Astounding promises follow the calls to repentance
to encourage Israel to return. The Lord will heal their apostasy. As noted
in 5:13–14, the prophets often depict sin as a sickness and renewal as
healing.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 14:5 Dew was an important source of water for Israel.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 14:6 his shoots shall spread out. An expanding kingdom
is like the growth of a great tree: Israel’s original calling was to spread its
influence through the whole world.
HOSEA—NOTE ON 14:7 they shall flourish like the grain . . . like the vine .
. . like the wine. Israel again becomes a choice vine, which was her purpose
from the beginning (compare 10:1). The landscape described here is an
Eden-like paradise, illustrating covenant renewal (compare 2:14–23).
HOSEA—NOTE ON 14:9 The Lord is justified in punishing Israel for
ingratitude and covenant breaking. Yet there is a final appeal for the wise,
who understand (compare 4:14). Most of the book has addressed Ephraim
as a corporate body, but these terms focus on the response of individual
Israelites. There are some in Israel who really understand the grace that God
offers in his covenant.
J o e l
(return to table of contents)
Joel 1 • Joel 2 • Joel 3
Introduction to Joel
Timeline
Author and Date
Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Joel
Global Message of Joel
Joel in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Joel
The Global Message of Joel for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Joel
Introduction to Joel
Timeline
Author and Date
Little is known about Joel, a prophet from Judah (perhaps Jerusalem). Most
scholars date the book after the exile to Babylon (586 B.C.).
Background
Joel calls the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem to lament and return to the
Lord during a time of national disaster. A locust plague has destroyed both
wine (1:5, 7, 12) and grain (1:10). This threatens the people’s ability to present
offerings in the temple (1:9, 13, 16).
Key Themes
1. Day of the Lord. The dominant theme of the book is the “day of the Lord.”
This describes a time when the presence of the Lord brings judgment
and/or deliverance and blessing, depending on the circumstances.
Therefore, although the “day” results in destruction for the nations, it can
also be seen as a time of salvation for God’s people. The Lord remains a
refuge in the chaos of judgment (3:15–16).
2. Repentance. If the whole community would cry out to the Lord (1:13–20)
and look to him—not merely with external actions but in sincerity and
commitment (2:12–13)—then judgment may be prevented. However, the
Lord is not bound by the acts of the community (2:14). It is his decision to
either send or withhold the destruction by the locusts (1:15), just as the
army is his to command (2:11).
3. The Lord in their midst. The reason the Lord will turn from judgment to
blessing is to express his covenant-keeping character (2:13, 18–26; 3:18).
His promise to dwell in the midst of his people is prominent not only in
Joel (2:27; 3:17, 21) but also throughout the OT (Num. 35:34; Isa. 12:6;
Zeph. 3:15, 17; Zech. 2:10–11). God restores what the locusts have
destroyed (Joel 2:27) and protects Israel as the world crumbles (3:16–17)
so that the people will know his presence. This theme is restated at the end
of the book (3:21), showing how important it was for Joel.
4. These three themes come together in the promise of the future outpouring
of the Spirit (2:28–32). This outpouring is associated with the day of the
Lord (2:31) in both its judgmental (2:30–31; see 2:10; 3:15) and its saving
(2:32) roles. The outpouring of the Spirit is also related to repentance:
those who are saved call “on the name of the LORD” (2:32). The giving of
the Spirit is the ultimate evidence of God “in the midst of” his people (Isa.
63:11; see Hag. 2:5).
Outline
I. The Judgment against Judah and the Day of the Lord (1:1–2:17)
A. Locust invasion: forerunner of the day of the Lord (1:1–20)
B. Army invasion: the arrival of the day of the Lord (2:1–17)
II. The Mercy of the Lord and Judgment against the Nations (2:18–3:21)
A. Mercy: the Lord responds by restoring his people (2:18–32)
B. Judgment: the Lord’s judgment against the nations and his dwelling
with his people (3:1–21)
The Setting of Joel
c. 500 B.C.?
Though there is much debate about the date of Joel’s prophecies, it is likely
that they occurred during a national calamity sometime after Judah returned
from exile in Babylon.
The Global Message of Joel
The central message of Joel, as is so often the case in the prophets, is that of
salvation amid judgment. And in Joel both judgment and salvation are
worldwide in nature. Judgment is global in the sense that, throughout Joel,
judgment will come upon Israel (Joel 1:15; 2:2, 11) as well as upon the
nations of the world (3:2–3). Salvation is global in the sense that God will
one day pour out his Spirit “on all flesh” (2:28), so that “everyone who calls
on the name of the LORD shall be saved” (2:32).
Joel in Redemptive History
The memory of Eden. In Eden, God brought forth a flourishing, vibrant
paradise. Food and drink were plentiful. Plants thrived. Mankind and
animals dwelt in happy unity. Above all, God dwelt in perfect fellowship
with his people. After the fall, in which this flourishing shalom was broken
on every level, God began the great historical work of restoring his people.
When the Lord describes the Promised Land as “flowing with milk and
honey,” for example (Ex. 3:8, 17), these are terms that would have been
understood by the Jews as describing a restoration of Eden (see Joel 2:3;
3:18).
The undoing of creation. Accordingly, time and again throughout the
prophets divine judgment is described as an undoing of what flourished in
Eden. Joel’s prophecy is filled with this kind of imagery. Joel 1 describes an
invasion of locusts as undoing precisely what had been done in creation:
“The fields are destroyed, the ground mourns, because the grain is
destroyed, the wine dries up, the oil languishes” (Joel 1:10). The cattle and
the sheep are starving (1:18, 20). And just as light dawned on the world in
creation, so blackness covers the earth in this undoing of creation: “The sun
and the moon are darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining” (2:10;
compare 2:2; 3:15).
The day of the Lord. All these signs of judgment are summed up in Joel’s
repeated reference to “the day of the LORD” (1:15; 2:1, 11, 31; 3:14). Joel
identifies the day of the Lord with the invasion of locusts, which utterly
destroy everything in their path. This is the judgment coming upon Israel
due to their sin. Yet even amid this sin, God will spare those who repent and
turn to him (2:12–14). God “will restore to you the years that the swarming
locust has eaten” (2:25).
Eden regained. This promise of divine restoration culminates in Joel’s
prophecy that God will pour out his Spirit at some future time “on all flesh”
(2:28–32). This prophecy was fulfilled on the day of Pentecost in Acts 2,
when God poured out his Spirit on a multitude of different nations (Acts
2:16–21). The prophecy will be brought to final completion and will
achieve its ultimate purpose when the saints worship Christ in heaven, the
“ransomed people for God from every tribe and language and people and
nation” (Rev. 5:9). There, Eden will be regained once and for all (Rev.
22:1–5), this time without any possibility of corruption.
Universal Themes in Joel
Judgment on godless nations. After recounting the swarms of locusts that
will plague Israel in Joel 1, and then promising final restoration for Israel in
Joel 2, the prophecy turns its focus in the third chapter to the nations. The
theme throughout Joel 3 is God’s righteous judgment on the godless nations
of the world. “I will gather all the nations and bring them down to the
Valley of Jehoshaphat. And I will enter into judgment with them there”
(Joel 3:2). Whatever injustices the nations of the world got away with then
or are getting away with today, especially injustice toward his own people,
God promises to bring such evil into judgment.
God’ s far-reaching grace in the midst of judgment. In Exodus 34, God
revealed himself to Moses as “a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger,
and abounding in steadfast love” (Ex. 34:6). This foundational description
of the Lord is picked up throughout the rest of the Old Testament, including
at Joel 2:13: “Return to the LORD your God, for he is gracious and merciful,
slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love.” The promise of restoration
in Joel 2 then culminates in the prophecy that God will pour out his Spirit
on all flesh and that “everyone who calls on the name of the LORD shall be
saved” (2:32). Centuries later, the apostle Paul quoted Joel 2:32 in Romans
to emphasize the universal scope of the gospel of grace (Rom. 10:12–13).
True repentance. As has happened so often down through the history of
God’s people, Israel in Joel’s day was performing the appropriate actions
for worship externally, but their hearts were far from God. “‘Yet even now,’
declares the LORD, ‘return to me with all your heart, with fasting, with
weeping, and with mourning; and rend your hearts and not your garments’”
(Joel 2:12–13). The tendency to try to get by on mere ritual is common to
fallen human nature, and wherever the church exists in the world it must
guard against this.
The Global Message of Joel for Today
Joel’s prophecy has much to say to the global church today. Indeed, in Joel
we find the message of the whole Bible in a nutshell: salvation amid
judgment.
Judgment is inevitable. Indeed, in light of God’s justice and holiness, it
would be wrong of God not to judge. Judgment will come both upon all
those who reject God outright as well as on those who claim to know him
yet who have resisted true repentance, choosing instead to worship him in a
merely formal, external, and hollow way. Divine justice will overtake every
unrepentant sinner, regardless of class, ethnicity, or culture. Injustice will be
defeated, and the Lord will establish his righteous reign.
Yet salvation awaits all who sincerely call upon the Lord. He welcomes
into his family those who truly cry out to him, whether they come from the
most religious or from the most ungodly background. To all those around
the world who trust in the Lord and what he has done in Jesus Christ for the
salvation of sinners, God will grant full and free forgiveness of sins. More
than this, he will pour out his own Spirit on them. And one day God will
finally bring all his people into a restored new creation, a return to Eden:
“And in that day the mountains shall drip sweet wine, and the hills shall
flow with milk, and all the streambeds of Judah shall flow with water; and a
fountain shall come forth from the house of the LORD” (Joel 3:18).