HOSEA 5 [†] v Hear this, O priests!
Pay attention, O house of Israel!
Give ear, O house of the king!
For the judgment is for you;
for w you have been a snare at Mizpah
and a net spread upon x Tabor.
2 And y the revolters z have gone deep into slaughter,
but a I will discipline all of them.
3
b I know Ephraim,
and Israel is not hidden from me;
for now, O Ephraim, you have played the whore;
Israel is defiled.
4 c Their deeds do not permit them
to return to their God.
For d the spirit of whoredom is within them,
and they know not the LORD.
5
e The pride of Israel testifies to his face; [1]
Israel and f Ephraim shall stumble in his guilt;
f Judah also shall stumble with them.
6
g With their flocks and herds they shall go
to seek the LORD,
g but they will not find him;
h he has withdrawn from them.
7
i They have dealt faithlessly with the LORD;
for they have borne alien children.
Now the new moon shall devour them with their fields.
8 j Blow the horn in k Gibeah,
the trumpet in l Ramah.
Sound the alarm at m Beth-aven;
we follow you, [2] O Benjamin!
9 Ephraim shall become a desolation
in the day of punishment;
among the tribes of Israel
I make known what is sure.
10[†] The princes of Judah have become
like n those who move the landmark;
upon them I will pour out
my wrath like water.
11 Ephraim is o oppressed, crushed in judgment,
because he was determined to go after filth. [3]
12 But I am p like a moth to Ephraim,
and p like dry rot to the house of Judah.
13[†] When Ephraim saw his sickness,
and Judah q his wound,
then Ephraim went r to Assyria,
and sent to the great king. [4]
s But he is not able to cure you
or heal q your wound.
14 For I will be t like a lion to u Ephraim,
and like a young lion to the house of u Judah.
v I, even I, will tear and go away;
I will carry off, and no one shall rescue.
15[†] w I will return again to my place,
until they acknowledge their guilt and seek my face,
and x in their distress earnestly seek me.
Israel and Judah Are Unrepentant
HOSEA 6 “Come, let us y return to the LORD;
for z he has torn us, that he may heal us;
he has struck us down, and a he will bind us up.
2[†] After two days b he will revive us;
on the third day he will raise us up,
that we may live before him.
3 c Let us know; c let us press on to know the LORD;
d his going out is sure as the dawn;
he will come to us e as the showers,
f as the spring rains that water the earth.”
4[†] What shall I do with you, g O h Ephraim?
What shall I do with you, O h Judah?
Your love is i like a morning cloud,
i like the dew that goes early away.
5[†] Therefore I have hewn them by the prophets;
I have slain them j by the words of my mouth,
and my judgment goes forth as the light.
6[†] For k I desire steadfast love [1] and not sacrifice,
l the knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings.
7[†] But m like Adam they n transgressed the covenant;
o there they dealt faithlessly with me.
8 p Gilead is a city of evildoers,
q tracked with blood.
9 As robbers r lie in wait for a man,
so the priests band together;
they murder on the way to s Shechem;
they commit villainy.
10 In the house of Israel I have seen a horrible thing;
t Ephraim’s whoredom is there; u Israel is defiled.
11 For you also, O u Judah, v a harvest is appointed,
when w I restore the fortunes of my people.
HOSEA 7 x When I would heal Israel,
the iniquity of Ephraim is revealed,
and the evil deeds of y Samaria;
for z they deal falsely;
the thief breaks in,
and the bandits raid outside.
2[†] But they do not consider
that a I remember all their evil.
Now b their deeds surround them;
c they are before my face.
3 By their evil d they make d the king glad,
and the princes by their treachery.
4[†] e They are all adulterers;
they are like a heated oven
whose baker ceases to stir the fire,
from the kneading of the dough
until it is leavened.
5 On the day of f our king, the princes
became sick with the heat of wine;
he stretched out his hand with mockers.
6 For with hearts like an oven g they approach their intrigue;
all night their anger smolders;
in the morning it blazes like a flaming fire.
7 All of them are hot as an oven,
and they devour their rulers.
All h their kings i have fallen,
and none of them calls upon me.
8[†] Ephraim j mixes himself with the peoples;
Ephraim is a cake not turned.
9 k Strangers devour his strength,
and l he knows it not;
gray hairs are sprinkled upon him,
and l he knows it not.
10 m The pride of Israel testifies to his face; [1]
n yet they do not return to the LORD their God,
nor seek him, for all this.
11 Ephraim is like a dove,
o silly and without sense,
calling to p Egypt, going to q Assyria.
12 As they go, r I will spread over them my net;
I will bring them down like birds of the heavens;
s I will discipline them t according to the report made to their
congregation.
13 u Woe to them, for they have strayed from me!
Destruction to them, for they have rebelled against me!
v I would redeem them,
but w they speak lies against me.
14[†] x They do not cry to me from the heart,
but y they wail upon their beds;
for grain and wine they gash themselves;
they rebel against me.
15 Although z I trained and strengthened their arms,
yet they devise evil against me.
16[†] They a return, but not upward; [2]
they are b like a treacherous bow;
their princes shall fall by the sword
because of c the insolence of their tongue.
This shall be their derision d in the land of Egypt.
Israel Will Reap the Whirlwind