HOSEA 9 [†] Rejoice not, O Israel!
Exult not like the peoples;
e for you have played the whore, forsaking your God.
f You have loved a prostitute’s wages
on all threshing floors.
2 g Threshing floor and wine vat shall not feed them,
and g the new wine shall fail them.
3[†] They shall not remain in h the land of the LORD,
but i Ephraim shall return to Egypt,
and j they shall eat unclean food in Assyria.
4 k They shall not pour drink offerings of wine to the LORD,
l and their sacrifices shall not please him.
It shall be like m mourners’ bread to them;
all who eat of it shall be defiled;
for their bread shall be for their hunger only;
n it shall not come to the house of the LORD.
5
o What will you do on the day of the appointed festival,
and on the day of the feast of the LORD?
6[†] For behold, they are going away from destruction;
but p Egypt shall gather them;
Memphis shall bury them.
Nettles shall possess q their precious things of silver;
r thorns shall be in their tents.
7 s The days of punishment have come;
the days of recompense have come;
Israel shall know it.
t The prophet is a fool;
the man of the spirit is mad,
because of your great iniquity
and great hatred.
8 The prophet is u the watchman of Ephraim with my God;
yet v a fowler’s snare is on all his ways,
and hatred in the house of his God.
9[†] w They have deeply corrupted themselves
as x in the days of Gibeah:
w he will remember their iniquity;
he will punish their sins.
10[†] Like grapes in the wilderness,
y I found Israel.
Like the first fruit on the fig tree
in its first season,
I saw your fathers.
But z they came to Baal-peor
and a consecrated themselves to the thing of shame,
and b became detestable like the thing they loved.
11 Ephraim’s c glory shall fly away like a bird—
d no birth, no pregnancy, no conception!
12 e Even if they bring up children,
I will bereave them till none is left.
f Woe to them
when g I depart from them!
13 Ephraim, h as I have seen, was like a young palm [1] planted in a
meadow;
but e Ephraim must lead his children out to slaughter. [2]
14[†] Give them, O LORD—
what will you give?
Give them i a miscarrying womb
and dry breasts.
15 Every evil of theirs is in j Gilgal;
there I began to hate them.
Because of the wickedness of their deeds
I will drive them out of my house.
I will love them no more;
all k their princes are l rebels.
16 Ephraim is stricken;
m their root is dried up;
they shall bear no fruit.
Even n though they give birth,
e I will put their beloved children to death.
17[†] o My God will reject them
because they have not listened to him;
p they shall be wanderers among the nations.