HOSEA 4 [†] k Hear the word of the LORD, O children of Israel,
for l the LORD has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land.
There is no faithfulness or steadfast love,
and m no knowledge of God in the land;
2
n there is swearing, lying, murder, stealing, and committing adultery;
they break all bounds, and o bloodshed follows bloodshed.
3 Therefore p the land mourns,
and all who dwell in it languish,
q and also the beasts of the field
and the birds of the heavens,
r and even the fish of the sea are taken away.
4 s Yet let no one contend,
and let none accuse,
for with you is t my contention, O priest. [1]
5[†] You shall stumble by day;
the prophet also shall stumble with you by night;
and I will destroy u your mother.
6[†] My people are destroyed v for lack of knowledge;
w because you have rejected knowledge,
I reject you x from being a priest to me.
And since you have forgotten the law of your God,
y I also will forget your children.
7 z The more they increased,
the more they sinned against me;
a I will change their glory into shame.
8
b They feed on the sin [2] of my people;
they are greedy for their iniquity.
9 c And it shall be like people, like priest;
I will punish them for their ways
and repay them for their deeds.
10[†] d They shall eat, but not be satisfied;
they shall play the whore, but not multiply,
because they have forsaken the LORD
to cherish 11whoredom, wine, and new wine,
which e take away the understanding.
12[†] My people f inquire of a piece of wood,
and their walking staff gives them oracles.
For g a spirit of whoredom has led them astray,
and they have left their God to play the whore.
13 h They sacrifice on the tops of the mountains
and burn offerings on the hills,
i under oak, poplar, and terebinth,
because their shade is good.
Therefore your daughters play the whore,
and your brides commit adultery.
14[†] I will not punish your daughters when they play the whore,
nor your brides when they commit adultery;
for j the men themselves go aside with prostitutes
and sacrifice with k cult prostitutes,
and a people l without understanding shall come to ruin.
15[†] Though you play the whore, O m Israel,
let not m Judah become guilty.
n Enter not into o Gilgal,
nor go up to p Beth-aven,
and swear not, “As the LORD lives.”
16 Like a stubborn heifer,
Israel is stubborn;
can the LORD now feed them
like a lamb in a broad pasture?
17
q Ephraim is joined to idols;
r leave him alone.
18 When their drink is gone, they give themselves to whoring;
s their rulers [3] dearly love shame.
19 t A wind has wrapped them [4] in its wings,
and they shall u be ashamed because of their sacrifices.
Punishment Coming for Israel and Judah