HOSEA 13 [†] When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling;
b he was exalted in Israel,
but he incurred guilt c through Baal and died.
2[†] And now they sin more and more,
and d make for themselves metal images,
idols skillfully made of their silver,
e all of them the work of craftsmen.
It is said of them,
“Those who offer human sacrifice f kiss calves!”
3 Therefore they shall be g like the morning mist
or g like the dew that goes early away,
h like the chaff that swirls from the threshing floor
or i like smoke from a window.
4[†] But j I am the LORD your God
from the land of Egypt;
k you know no God but me,
and l besides me there is no savior.
5 m It was I who knew you in the wilderness,
in the land of drought;
6 n but when they had grazed, [1] they became full,
o they were filled, and their heart was lifted up;
o therefore they forgot me.
7[†] So p I am to them like a lion;
q like a leopard I will lurk beside the way.
8 I will fall upon them r like a bear robbed of her cubs;
I will tear open their breast,
and there I will devour them like a lion,
s as a wild beast would rip them open.
9[†] He destroys [2] you, O Israel,
for you are against me, against t your helper.
10
u Where now is your king, to save you in all your cities?
Where are all your rulers—
those of whom v you said,
“Give me a king and princes”?
11 w I gave you a king in my anger,
and x I took him away in my wrath.
12[†] The iniquity of Ephraim is y bound up;
his sin is y kept in store.
13
z The pangs of childbirth come for him,
but he is an unwise son,
for at the right time he does not present himself
a at the opening of the womb.
14[†] b Shall I ransom them from the power of Sheol?
b Shall I redeem them from Death?
c O d Death, where are your plagues?
c O d Sheol, where is your sting?
e Compassion is hidden from my eyes.
15 Though f he may flourish among his brothers,
g the east wind, the wind of the LORD, shall come,
rising from the wilderness,
h and his fountain shall dry up;
his spring shall be parched;
it shall strip i his treasury
of every precious thing.
16 [3] Samaria j shall bear her guilt,
because k she has rebelled against her God;
they shall fall by the sword;
l their little ones shall be dashed in pieces,
and their m pregnant women ripped open.
A Plea to Return to the LORD