ISAIAH 5 [†] Let me sing for my beloved
my love song concerning his vineyard:
My beloved had v a vineyard
on a very fertile hill.
2[†] He dug it and cleared it of stones,
and planted it with w choice vines;
he built a watchtower in the midst of it,
and hewed out a wine vat in it;
and x he looked for it to yield grapes,
but it yielded wild grapes.
3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem
and men of Judah,
judge between me and my vineyard.
4 y What more was there to do for my vineyard,
that I have not done in it?
x When I looked for it to yield grapes,
why did it yield wild grapes?
5 And now I will tell you
what I will do to my vineyard.
I will remove z its hedge,
and it shall be devoured; [1]
a I will break down its wall,
and it shall be trampled down.
6 I will make it a waste;
it shall not be pruned or hoed,
and b briers and thorns shall grow up;
c I will also command the clouds
that they rain no rain upon it.
7[†] d For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts
is the house of Israel,
and the men of Judah
are his pleasant planting;
and he looked for justice,
but behold, bloodshed; [2]
for righteousness,
but behold, an outcry! [3]
Woe to the Wicked
8[†] Woe to those who e join house to house,
who add field to field,
until there is no more room,
and you are made to dwell alone
in the midst of the land.
9 The LORD of hosts has sworn in my hearing:
f “Surely many houses shall be desolate,
large and beautiful houses, without inhabitant.
10 g For ten acres [4] of vineyard shall yield but one bath,
and a h homer of seed shall yield but an ephah.” [5]
11 Woe to those who i rise early in the morning,
that they may run after strong drink,
who tarry late into the evening
as wine inflames them!
12
j They have lyre and harp,
tambourine and flute and wine at their feasts,
k but they do not regard the deeds of the LORD,
or see the work of his hands.
13 Therefore my people go into exile
l for lack of knowledge; [6]
their m honored men go hungry, [7]
and their multitude is parched with thirst.
14[†] Therefore Sheol has n enlarged its appetite
and opened o its mouth beyond measure,
and the nobility of Jerusalem [8] and her multitude will go down,
her revelers and he who p exults in her.
15
q Man is humbled, and each one is brought low,
and the eyes of the haughty [9] are brought low.
16 r But the LORD of hosts is exalted [10] in justice,
and the Holy God shows himself holy in righteousness.
17 Then shall the lambs graze s as in their pasture,
and t nomads shall eat among the ruins of the rich.
18[†] Woe to those who draw iniquity with u cords of falsehood,
who draw sin as with cart ropes,
19 who say: v “Let him be quick,
let him speed his work
that we may see it;
let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw near,
and let it come, that we may know it!”
20 Woe to w those who call evil good
and good evil,
x who put darkness for light
and light for darkness,
who put bitter for sweet
and sweet for bitter!
21 Woe to those who are y wise in their own eyes,
and shrewd in their own sight!
22 Woe to those who are z heroes at drinking wine,
and valiant men in mixing strong drink,
23 who a acquit the guilty for a bribe,
and deprive the innocent of his right!
24[†] Therefore, b as the tongue of fire devours the stubble,
and as dry grass sinks down in the flame,
so c their root will be d as rottenness,
and their blossom go up like dust;
for they have e rejected the law of the LORD of hosts,
and have f despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.
25 Therefore g the anger of the LORD was kindled against his people,
and he stretched out his hand against them and struck them,
and h the mountains quaked;
and their corpses were i as refuse
in the midst of the streets.
j For all this his anger has not turned away,
and his hand is stretched out still.
26[†] He will k raise a signal for nations far away,
and l whistle for them m from the ends of the earth;
and behold, quickly, speedily they come!
27[†] n None is weary, none stumbles,
none slumbers or sleeps,
not a waistband is loose,
not a sandal strap broken;
28 o their arrows are sharp,
all their bows bent,
their horses’ hoofs seem like flint,
and their wheels p like the whirlwind.
29 Their roaring is like a lion,
like young lions they roar;
they growl and q seize their prey;
they carry it off, and none can rescue.
30[†] They will growl over it on that day,
like the growling of the sea.
And if one looks to the land,
behold, r darkness and distress;
and the light is darkened by its clouds.
Isaiah’s Vision of the Lord