ISAIAH 54 [†] h “Sing, O barren one, who did not bear;
break forth into singing and cry aloud,
you who have not been in labor!
For the children of i the desolate one j will be more
than the children of her who is married,” says the LORD.
2 k “Enlarge the place of your tent,
and let the curtains of your habitations be stretched out;
do not hold back; lengthen your cords
and strengthen your stakes.
3[†] l For you will spread abroad to the right and to the left,
and your offspring will possess the nations
and will people the desolate cities.
4 “Fear not, m for you will not be ashamed;
be not confounded, for you will not be disgraced;
for you will forget the shame of your youth,
and the reproach of your widowhood you will remember no more.
5 n For your Maker is your husband,
the LORD of hosts is his name;
o and the Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer,
p the God of the whole earth he is called.
6[†] q For the LORD has called you
like a wife deserted and grieved in spirit,
like a wife of youth when she is cast off,
says your God.
7[†] r For a brief moment I deserted you,
but with great compassion I will gather you.
8
r In overflowing anger for a moment
I hid my face from you,
s but with everlasting love I will have compassion on you,”
says the LORD, your Redeemer.
9 “This is like t the days of Noah [1] to me:
as I swore that the waters of Noah
should no more go over the earth,
so I have sworn that I will not be angry with you,
and will not rebuke you.
10[†] For the mountains may depart
and the hills be removed,
but my steadfast love shall not depart from you,
and u my covenant of peace shall not be removed,”
says the LORD, who has compassion on you.
11 v “O afflicted one, storm-tossed and not comforted,
behold, w I will set your stones in antimony,
x and lay your foundations with sapphires. [2]
12 I will make your pinnacles of agate, [3]
your gates of carbuncles, [4]
and all your wall of precious stones.
13[†] y All your children z shall be taught by the LORD,
a and great shall be the peace of your children.
14 In righteousness you shall be established;
you shall be far from oppression, for you shall not fear;
and from terror, for it shall not come near you.
15[†] b If anyone stirs up strife,
it is not from me;
whoever stirs up strife with you
shall fall because of you.
16 Behold, I have created the smith
who blows the fire of coals
and produces a weapon for its purpose.
I have also created the ravager to destroy;
17 no weapon that is fashioned against you shall succeed,
and you shall refute every tongue that rises against you in judgment.
This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD
c and their vindication [5] from me, declares the LORD.”
The Compassion of the LORD