ISAIAH 34 [†] Draw near, v O nations, to hear,
and give attention, O peoples!
Let the earth hear, and all that fills it;
the world, and all that comes from it.
2[†] For the LORD is enraged against all the nations,
and furious against all their host;
he has w devoted them to destruction, [1] has given them over for
slaughter.
3 Their slain shall be cast out,
and x the stench of their corpses shall rise;
y the mountains shall flow with their blood.
4 z All the host of heaven shall rot away,
and the skies roll up like a scroll.
All their host shall fall,
as leaves fall from the vine,
like leaves falling from the fig tree.
5[†] For my sword has drunk its fill in the heavens;
behold, it descends for judgment upon a Edom,
upon the people b I have devoted to destruction.
6 The LORD has a sword; it is sated with blood;
it is gorged with fat,
with the blood of lambs and goats,
with the fat of the kidneys of rams.
c For the LORD has a sacrifice in Bozrah,
a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
7 d Wild oxen shall e fall with them,
and f young steers with f the mighty bulls.
Their land shall drink its fill of blood,
and their soil shall be gorged with fat.
8
g For the LORD has a day of vengeance,
a year of recompense for the cause of Zion.
9 h And the streams of Edom [2] shall be turned into pitch,
and her soil into sulfur;
her land shall become burning pitch.
10 Night and day i it shall not be quenched;
j its smoke shall go up forever.
k From generation to generation it shall lie waste;
none shall pass through it forever and ever.
11[†] l But the hawk and the porcupine [3] shall possess it,
the owl and the raven shall dwell in it.
m He shall stretch the line of n confusion [4] over it,
and the plumb line of emptiness.
12 Its nobles—there is no one there to call it a kingdom,
and all its princes shall be nothing.
13[†] o Thorns shall grow over its strongholds,
nettles and thistles in its fortresses.
It shall be the haunt of p jackals,
an abode for ostriches. [5]
14
q And wild animals shall meet with hyenas;
the wild goat shall cry to his fellow;
indeed, there the night bird [6] settles
and finds for herself a resting place.
15 There the owl nests and lays
and hatches and gathers her young in her shadow;
indeed, there r the hawks are gathered,
each one with her mate.
16[†] Seek and read from the book of the LORD:
Not one of these shall be missing;
none shall be without her mate.
For the mouth of the LORD has commanded,
and his Spirit has gathered them.
17 s He has cast the lot for them;
his hand has portioned it out to them with the line;
they shall possess it forever;
from generation to generation they shall dwell in it.
The Ransomed Shall Return