ISAIAH 60 [†] b Arise, shine, for your light has come,
and c the glory of the LORD has risen upon you.
2[†] For behold, darkness shall cover the earth,
and thick darkness the peoples;
but the LORD will arise upon you,
and his glory will be seen upon you.
3 d And nations shall come to your light,
and kings to the brightness of your rising.
4[†] e Lift up your eyes all around, and see;
they all gather together, they come to you;
f your sons shall come from afar,
and your daughters shall be carried on the hip.
5[†] Then you shall see and g be radiant;
your heart shall thrill and exult, [1]
because the abundance of the sea shall be turned to you,
h the wealth of the nations shall come to you.
6 A multitude of camels shall cover you,
the young camels of i Midian and j Ephah;
all those from k Sheba shall come.
l They shall bring gold and frankincense,
and shall bring good news, the praises of the LORD.
7 All the flocks of m Kedar shall be gathered to you;
the rams of n Nebaioth shall minister to you;
o they shall come up with acceptance on my altar,
p and I will beautify my beautiful house.
8[†] Who are these that fly like a cloud,
and q like doves to their windows?
9 For r the coastlands shall hope for me,
s the ships of Tarshish first,
t to bring your children from afar,
their silver and gold with them,
for the name of the LORD your God,
and for the Holy One of Israel,
because u he has made you beautiful.
10[†] v Foreigners shall build up your walls,
and v their kings shall minister to you;
for in my wrath I struck you,
but in my favor I have had mercy on you.
11[†] w Your gates shall be open continually;
day and night they shall not be shut,
w that people may bring to you the wealth of the nations,
with their kings led in procession.
12 x For the nation and kingdom
that will not serve you shall perish;
those nations shall be utterly laid waste.
13[†] y The glory of Lebanon shall come to you,
the cypress, the plane, and z the pine,
to beautify the place of my sanctuary,
and I will make the place of my feet glorious.
14 a The sons of those who afflicted you
shall come bending low to you,
b and all who despised you
shall bow down at your feet;
c they shall call you the City of the LORD,
the Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
15 d Whereas you have been forsaken and hated,
with no one passing through,
e I will make you majestic forever,
a joy from age to age.
16[†] f You shall suck the milk of nations;
you shall nurse at the breast of kings;
and you shall know that g I, the LORD, am your Savior
and your Redeemer, h the Mighty One of Jacob.
17 Instead of bronze I will bring gold,
and instead of iron I will bring silver;
instead of wood, bronze,
instead of stones, iron.
I will make your overseers peace
i and your taskmasters righteousness.
18
j Violence shall no more be heard in your land,
devastation or destruction within your borders;
k you shall call your walls Salvation,
and your gates Praise.
19[†] l The sun shall be no more
your light by day,
nor for brightness shall the moon
give you light; [2]
but the LORD will be your everlasting light,
and your God will be your glory. [3]
20 Your sun shall no more go down,
nor your moon withdraw itself;
for the LORD will be your everlasting light,
and m your days of mourning shall be ended.
21[†] n Your people shall all be righteous;
o they shall possess the land forever,
p the branch of my planting, the work of my hands,
that I might be glorified. [4]
22 q The least one shall become a clan,
and the smallest one a mighty nation;
r I am the LORD;
in its time I will hasten it.
The Year of the LORD’s Favor