ISAIAH 8 [†]Then the LORD said to me, “Take a large tablet w and write on it
in common characters, [1] ‘Belonging to Maher-shalal-hash-baz.’ [2] 2And x I
will get reliable witnesses, y Uriah the priest and Zechariah the son of
Jeberechiah, to attest for me.”
3[†]And I went to the prophetess, and she conceived and bore a son. Then
the LORD said to me, z “Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz; 4 a for before
the boy knows how to cry ‘My father’ or ‘My mother,’ the a wealth of
b Damascus and the spoil of b Samaria will be carried away before the king
of Assyria.”
5The LORD spoke to me again: 6[†]“Because this people has refused the
waters of c Shiloah that flow gently, and rejoice over d Rezin and the son of
Remaliah, 7therefore, behold, the Lord is bringing up against them e the
waters of f the River, mighty and many, the king of Assyria and all his glory.
And it g will rise over all its channels and go over all its banks, 8and it will
sweep on into Judah, it will overflow and pass on, h reaching even to the
neck, and its i outspread wings will fill the breadth of your land, j O
Immanuel.”
9[†] Be broken, [3] you peoples, and k be shattered; [4]
give ear, all you far countries;
strap on your armor and be shattered;
strap on your armor and be shattered.
10 Take counsel together, but it will come to nothing;
speak a word, l but it will not stand,
for God m is with us. [5]
Fear God, Wait for the LORD
11[†]For the LORD spoke thus to me with his strong hand upon me, and
n warned me not to walk in the way of this people, saying: 12“Do not call
o conspiracy all that this people calls conspiracy, and p do not fear what
they fear, nor be in dread. 13But the LORD of hosts, q him you shall honor as
holy. Let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. 14And he will become
a r sanctuary and s a stone of offense and a rock of stumbling to both houses
of Israel, a trap and a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 15And many
t shall stumble on it. They shall fall and be broken; they shall be snared and
taken.”
16[†]Bind up u the testimony; v seal the teaching [6] among my disciples.
17I will w wait for the LORD, who is x hiding his face from the house of
Jacob, and I will hope in him. 18 y Behold, I and z the children whom the
LORD has given me are signs and portents in Israel from the LORD of hosts,
who dwells on Mount Zion. 19And when they say to you, “Inquire of the
a mediums and the necromancers who chirp and mutter,” should not a
people inquire of their God? Should they inquire of b the dead on behalf of
the living? 20
c To the teaching and to the testimony! If they will not speak
according to this word, it is because they have no d dawn. 21They will pass
through the land, [7] greatly distressed and hungry. And when they are
hungry, they will be enraged and will speak contemptuously against [8] their
king and their God, and turn their faces upward. 22 e And they will look to
the earth, but behold, distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish. And they
will be thrust into f thick darkness.
For to Us a Child Is Born