ISAIAH 14 [†] n For the LORD will have compassion on Jacob and will again
choose Israel, and o will set them in their own land, and p sojourners will
join them and will attach themselves to the house of Jacob. 2[†]And q the
peoples will take them and bring them to their place, and the house of Israel
will possess them in the LORD’s land r as male and female slaves. [1] s They
will take captive those who were their captors, t and rule over those who
oppressed them.
Israel’s Remnant Taunts Babylon
3When the LORD has given you rest from your pain and turmoil and the hard
service with which you were made to serve, 4[†]you will take up this u taunt
against the king of Babylon:
“How the oppressor has ceased,
v the insolent fury [2] ceased!
5 The LORD has broken the w staff of the wicked,
the w scepter of rulers,
6 x that struck the peoples in wrath
with unceasing blows,
that ruled the nations in anger
with unrelenting persecution.
7 The whole earth is at rest and quiet;
y they break forth into singing.
8 z a The cypresses rejoice at you,
b the cedars of Lebanon, saying,
‘Since you were laid low,
no woodcutter comes up against us.’
9 Sheol beneath is stirred up
to meet you when you come;
it rouses the shades to greet you,
all who were leaders of the earth;
it raises from their thrones
all who were kings of the nations.
10 c All of them will answer
and say to you:
‘You too have become as weak as we!
You have become like us!’
11 Your pomp is brought down to Sheol,
the sound of your harps;
maggots are laid as a bed beneath you,
and worms are your covers.
12[†] “How d you are fallen from heaven,
O Day Star, e son of Dawn!
How you are cut down to the ground,
you who laid the nations low!
13 You said in your heart,
f ‘I will ascend to heaven;
above the stars of God
g I will set my throne on high;
I will sit on the mount of assembly
in the far reaches of the north; [3]
14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds;
I will make myself like the Most High.’
15 h But you are brought down to Sheol,
to the far reaches of the pit.
16 Those who see you will stare at you
and ponder over you:
‘Is this i the man who made the earth tremble,
who shook kingdoms,
17 who made the world like a desert
and overthrew its cities,
j who did not let his prisoners go home?’
18 All the kings of the nations lie in glory,
each in his own tomb; [4]
19 but you are cast out, away from your grave,
like a loathed branch,
k clothed with the slain, those pierced by the sword,
who go down to the stones of the pit,
like a dead body trampled underfoot.
20 You will not be joined with them in burial,
because you have destroyed your land,
you have slain your people.
“May l the offspring of evildoers
nevermore be named!
21[†] Prepare slaughter for his sons
m because of the guilt of their fathers,
lest they rise and possess the earth,
and fill the face of the world with cities.”
22[†]“I will rise up against them,” declares the LORD of hosts, “and will
cut off from Babylon name and n remnant, o descendants and posterity,”
declares the LORD.
23“And I will make it a possession of the p hedgehog, [5]
and pools of water, and I will sweep it with the broom of destruction,”
declares the LORD of hosts.
An Oracle Concerning Assyria
24 The LORD of hosts has sworn:
q “As I have planned,
so shall it be,
and as I have purposed,
so shall it stand,
25[†] that r I will break the Assyrian in my land,
and on my mountains trample him underfoot;
and s his yoke shall depart from them,
and s his burden from their shoulder.”
26 This is the purpose that is purposed
concerning the whole earth,
and this is t the hand that is stretched out
over all the nations.
27 u For the LORD of hosts has purposed,
and who will annul it?
t His hand is stretched out,
and who will turn it back?
An Oracle Concerning Philistia
28[†]In the year that v King Ahaz died came this w oracle:
29[†] Rejoice not, x O Philistia, all of you,
that y the rod that struck you is broken,
for from the serpent’s root will come forth an adder,
and its fruit will be a z flying fiery serpent.
30[†] And the firstborn of a the poor will graze,
and a the needy lie down in safety;
but I will kill your root with famine,
and your remnant it will slay.
31 b Wail, O c gate; cry out, O city;
melt in fear, x O Philistia, all of you!
d For smoke comes out of the north,
and there is no straggler in his ranks.
32 What will one answer the messengers of the nation?
e “The LORD has founded Zion,
and in her the afflicted of his people find refuge.”
An Oracle Concerning Moab