ISAIAH 52 [†] c Awake, awake,
put on your strength, O Zion;
d put on your beautiful garments,
O Jerusalem, e the holy city;
f for there shall no more come into you
the uncircumcised and the unclean.
2 g Shake yourself from the dust and arise;
be seated, O Jerusalem;
h loose the bonds from your neck,
O captive daughter of Zion.
3For thus says the LORD: i “You were sold for nothing, and j you shall be
redeemed without money.” 4[†]For thus says the Lord GOD: k “My people
went down at the first into Egypt to sojourn there, and the Assyrian
oppressed them for nothing. [1] 5Now therefore what have I here,” declares
the LORD, “seeing that my people are taken away for nothing? Their rulers
wail,” declares the LORD, “and l continually all the day my name is
despised. 6Therefore my people shall know my name. m Therefore in that
day they shall know that it is I who speak; here I am.”
7[†] n How beautiful upon the mountains
are the feet of him who brings good news,
who publishes peace, o who brings good news of happiness,
who publishes salvation,
who says to Zion, “Your God reigns.”
8 The voice of p your watchmen—they lift up their voice;
together they sing for joy;
q for eye to eye they see
the return of the LORD to Zion.
9 r Break forth together into singing,
s you waste places of Jerusalem,
for t the LORD has comforted his people;
he has redeemed Jerusalem.
10[†] u The LORD has bared his holy arm
before the eyes of all the nations,
v and all the ends of the earth shall see
the salvation of our God.
11
w Depart, depart, go out from there;
touch no unclean thing;
go out from the midst of her; purify yourselves,
x you who bear the vessels of the LORD.
12 For you shall not y go out in haste,
and you shall not go in flight,
z for the LORD will go before you,
a and the God of Israel will be your rear guard.
He Was Pierced for Our Transgressions
13[†] Behold, b my servant shall act wisely; [2]
he shall be high and lifted up,
and shall be exalted.
14[†] As many were astonished at you—
c his appearance was so marred, beyond human semblance,
and his form beyond that of the children of mankind—
15 so d shall he sprinkle [3] many nations;
e kings shall shut their mouths because of him;
f for that which has not been told them they see,
and that which they have not heard they understand.