ISAIAH 22 [†]The v oracle concerning w the valley of vision.
What do you mean that you have gone up,
all of you, to the housetops,
2 you who are full of shoutings,
tumultuous city, x exultant town?
Your slain are y not slain with the sword
or dead in battle.
3 z All your leaders have fled together;
without the bow they were captured.
All of you who were found were captured,
though they had fled far away.
4 Therefore I said:
“Look away from me;
a let me weep bitter tears;
do not labor to comfort me
concerning the destruction of the daughter of my people.”
5[†] b For the Lord GOD of hosts has c a day
of tumult and d trampling and e confusion
in w the valley of vision,
a battering down of walls
and a shouting to the mountains.
6[†] And f Elam bore the quiver
with chariots and horsemen,
and g Kir uncovered the shield.
7[†] Your choicest valleys were full of chariots,
and the horsemen took their stand at the gates.
8[†] He has taken away h the covering of Judah.
In that day you looked to i the weapons of the House of the Forest, 9and
you saw that j the breaches of the city of David were many. k You collected
the waters of the lower pool, 10and you counted the houses of Jerusalem,
and you broke down the houses to fortify the wall. 11 k You made a reservoir
between l the two walls for the water of m the old pool. But n you did not
look to him who did it, or see him who planned it long ago.
12[†] In that day o the Lord GOD of hosts
called for weeping and mourning,
for p baldness and q wearing sackcloth;
13 and behold, joy and gladness,
killing oxen and slaughtering sheep,
eating flesh and drinking wine.
r “Let us eat and drink,
for tomorrow we die.”
14[†] The LORD of hosts s has revealed himself in my ears:
“Surely t this iniquity will not be atoned for you u until you die,”
says the Lord GOD of hosts.
15Thus says the Lord GOD of hosts, “Come, go to this steward, to
v Shebna, who is over the household, and say to him: 16What have you to
do here, and whom have you here, w that you have cut out here a tomb for
yourself, you x who cut out a tomb on the height and carve a dwelling for
yourself in the rock? 17Behold, the LORD will hurl you away violently, O
you strong man. y He will seize firm hold on you 18and whirl you around
and around, and throw you like a ball into a wide land. There you shall die,
and there shall be z your glorious chariots, you shame of your master’s
house. 19 a I will thrust you from your office, and you will be pulled down
from your station. 20[†]In that day I will call my servant b Eliakim the son
of Hilkiah, 21and b I will clothe him with your robe, and will bind your sash
on him, and will commit your authority to his hand. And he shall be c a
father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. 22[†]And I
will place d on his shoulder e the key of the house of David. f He shall open,
and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open. 23And I will
fasten him g like a peg in a secure place, and he will become h a throne of
honor to his father’s house. 24And they will hang on him the whole honor of
his father’s house, the offspring and issue, every small vessel, from the cups
to all the flagons. 25In that day, declares the LORD of hosts, g the peg that
was fastened in a secure place will give way, and it will be cut down and
fall, and the load that was on it will be cut off, for the LORD has spoken.”
An Oracle Concerning Tyre and Sidon