ISAIAH 26 [†]In that day e this song will be sung in the land of Judah:
“We have a strong city;
he sets up f salvation
as walls and bulwarks.
2[†] g Open the gates,
that the righteous nation that keeps faith may enter in.
3[†] h You keep him in perfect peace
whose mind is stayed on you,
because he trusts in you.
4[†] Trust in the LORD forever,
for the LORD GOD is an everlasting rock.
5
i For he has humbled
the inhabitants of the height,
the lofty city.
He lays it low, lays it low to the ground,
casts it to the dust.
6 The foot tramples it,
the feet of j the poor,
the steps of j the needy.”
7 The path of the righteous is level;
k you make level the way of the righteous.
8[†] In the path of your judgments,
O LORD, we wait for you;
l your name and l remembrance
are the desire of our soul.
9 My soul yearns for you in the night;
my spirit within me earnestly seeks you.
m For when your judgments are in the earth,
the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness.
10[†] n If favor is shown to the wicked,
he does not learn righteousness;
in the land of uprightness he deals corruptly
and does not see the majesty of the LORD.
11 O LORD, o your hand is lifted up,
but p they do not see it.
Let them see your zeal for your people, and be ashamed.
Let q the fire for your adversaries consume them.
12[†] O LORD, you will ordain r peace for us,
for you have indeed done for us all our works.
13[†] O LORD our God,
s other lords besides you have ruled over us,
t but your name alone we bring to remembrance.
14 They are dead, they will not live;
they are shades, they will not arise;
to that end you have visited them with destruction
and wiped out all remembrance of them.
15 u But you have increased the nation, O LORD,
you have increased the nation; you are glorified;
v you have enlarged all the borders of the land.
16[†] O LORD, w in distress they sought you;
they poured out a whispered prayer
when your discipline was upon them.
17 x Like a pregnant woman
who writhes and cries out in her pangs
when she is near to giving birth,
so were we because of you, O LORD;
18 x we were pregnant, we writhed,
but we have given birth to wind.
We have accomplished no deliverance in the earth,
and the inhabitants of the world have not fallen.
19[†] y Your dead shall live; their bodies shall rise.
You who dwell in the dust, awake and sing for joy!
For z your dew is a dew of light,
and the earth will give birth to the dead.
20[†] Come, my people, enter your chambers,
and shut your doors behind you;
hide yourselves a for a little while
until the fury has passed by.
21 b For behold, the LORD is coming out from his place
to punish the inhabitants of c the earth for their iniquity,
and the earth will disclose the blood shed on it,
and will no more cover its slain.
The Redemption of Israel