JEREMIAH 36 [†]In the f fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of
Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2“Take g a scroll and
h write on it all the words that I have spoken to you against Israel and
i Judah j and all the nations, k from the day I spoke to you, from the days of
Josiah until today.
3 l It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the
disaster that I intend to do to them, m so that every one may turn from his
evil way, and n that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.”
4[†]Then Jeremiah called o Baruch the son of Neriah, and o Baruch wrote
on g a scroll at the dictation of Jeremiah all the words of the LORD that he
had spoken to him. 5And Jeremiah ordered o Baruch, saying, p “I am
banned from going to the house of the LORD,
6[†]so you are to go, and q on
a day of fasting in the hearing of all the people in the LORD’s house you
shall read the words of the LORD from the scroll that you have written at my
dictation. You shall read them also in the hearing of all the men of Judah
who come out of their cities. 7
l It may be that their plea for mercy will come
before the LORD, m and that every one will turn from his evil way, for great
is the anger and wrath that the LORD has pronounced against this people.”
8And Baruch the son of Neriah did all that Jeremiah the prophet ordered
him about reading from the scroll the words of the LORD in the LORD’s
house.
9 r In the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, s in the
ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came from
the cities of Judah to Jerusalem t proclaimed a fast before the LORD.
10Then,
in the hearing of all the people, Baruch read the words of Jeremiah from the
scroll, in the house of the LORD, in u the chamber of Gemariah the son of
Shaphan the secretary, which was in the upper court, at the entry of the New
Gate of the LORD’s house.
11When Micaiah the son of Gemariah, son of v Shaphan, heard all the
words of the LORD from the scroll, 12he went down to the king’s house, into
the secretary’s chamber, and w all the officials were sitting there: x Elishama
the secretary, y Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, y Elnathan z the son of Achbor,
y Gemariah the son of z Shaphan, Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the
officials. 13And Micaiah told them all the words that he had heard, when
Baruch read the scroll in the hearing of the people. 14Then all the officials
sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, son of a Shelemiah, son of Cushi, to say
to Baruch, “Take in your hand the scroll that you read in the hearing of the
people, and come.” So Baruch the son of Neriah took the scroll in his hand
and came to them. 15And they said to him, “Sit down and read it.” So
Baruch read it to them. 16When they heard all the words, they turned one to
another in fear. And they said to Baruch, b “We must report all these words
to the king.” 17Then they asked Baruch, “Tell us, please, how did you write
all these words? Was it at his dictation?” 18Baruch answered them, “He
dictated all these words to me, c while I wrote them with ink on the scroll.”
19Then the officials said to Baruch, “Go and hide, you and Jeremiah, and let
no one know where you are.”
20So they went into the court to the king, having put the scroll in d the
chamber of Elishama the secretary, and they reported all the words to the
king. 21Then the king sent Jehudi to get the scroll, and he took it from the
chamber of Elishama the secretary. And Jehudi read it to the king and all the
officials who stood beside the king. 22It was e the ninth month, and the king
was sitting in f the winter house, and there was a fire burning in the fire pot
before him. 23[†]As Jehudi read three or four columns, the king would cut
them off with a knife and throw them into the fire in the fire pot, until the
entire scroll was consumed in the fire that was in the fire pot. 24Yet g neither
the king nor any of his servants who heard all these words was afraid, h nor
did they tear their garments. 25Even when i Elnathan and Delaiah and
Gemariah j urged the king not to burn the scroll, he would not listen to
them. 26And the king commanded Jerahmeel the k king’s son and Seraiah
the son of Azriel and l Shelemiah the son of Abdeel to seize m Baruch the
secretary and Jeremiah the prophet, but the LORD hid them.
27Now after the king had burned the scroll with the words that Baruch
wrote at Jeremiah’s dictation, the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
28“Take another scroll and write on it all the former words that were in the
first scroll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah has burned. 29[†]And
concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah you shall say, ‘Thus says the LORD,
You have burned this scroll, saying, n “Why have you written in it that the
king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land, and will cut off
from it man and beast?” 30[†]Therefore thus says the LORD concerning
Jehoiakim king of Judah: o He shall have none p to sit on the throne of
David, q and his dead body shall be cast out to the heat by day and the frost
by night. 31
r And I will punish him and his offspring and his servants for
their iniquity. I will bring upon them and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem
and upon the people of Judah all the disaster that I have pronounced against
them, but they would not hear.’”
32Then Jeremiah took another scroll and gave it to s Baruch the scribe,
the son of Neriah, who t wrote on it at the dictation of Jeremiah all the
words of the scroll that Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire. And
many similar words were added to them.
Jeremiah Warns Zedekiah