JEREMIAH 29 [†]These are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet
sent from Jerusalem to i the surviving elders of the exiles, and to j the
priests, j the prophets, and j all the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had
taken into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon. 2This was after k King Jeconiah
and the queen mother, the eunuchs, the officials of Judah and Jerusalem, the
craftsmen, and the metal workers had departed from Jerusalem. 3The letter
was sent by the hand of Elasah the son of l Shaphan and Gemariah the son
of m Hilkiah, whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to Babylon to
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. It said: 4“Thus says the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel, to all the exiles whom I have sent into exile from
Jerusalem to Babylon: 5
n Build houses and live in them; plant gardens and
eat their produce. 6Take wives and have sons and daughters; take wives for
your sons, and give your daughters in marriage, that they may bear sons and
daughters; multiply there, and do not decrease. 7[†]But seek the welfare of
the city where I have sent you into exile, and o pray to the LORD on its
behalf, for in its welfare you will find your welfare. 8For thus says the LORD
of hosts, the God of Israel: p Do not let your prophets and q your diviners
who are among you deceive you, and do not listen to the dreams that they
dream, [1] 9for r it is a lie that they are prophesying to you in my name; s I
did not send them, declares the LORD.
10“For thus says the LORD: t When seventy years are completed for
Babylon, u I will visit you, v and I will fulfill to you my promise v and bring
you back to this place. 11[†] w For I know the plans I have for you, declares
the LORD, plans for welfare [2] and not for evil, x to give you a future and a
hope. 12
y Then you will call upon me and come and pray to me, y and I will
hear you. 13[†] z You will seek me and find me, when you seek me a with all
your heart. 14[†]I will be found by you, declares the LORD, b and I will
restore your fortunes and c gather you from all the nations and all the places
d where I have driven you, declares the LORD, and I will bring you back to
the place from which I sent you into exile.
15“Because you have said, ‘The LORD has raised up prophets for us in
Babylon,’ 16thus says the LORD concerning e the king who sits on the throne
of David, and concerning all the people who dwell in this city, your
kinsmen who did not go out with you into exile: 17‘Thus says the LORD of
hosts, behold, I am sending on them f sword, famine, and pestilence, and I
will make them like g vile figs that are so rotten they cannot be eaten. 18I
will pursue them with f sword, famine, and pestilence, h and will make them
a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth, i to be a curse, a terror, a hissing,
and a reproach among all the nations d where I have driven them, 19because
they did not pay attention to my words, declares the LORD, j that I
persistently sent to you by my servants the prophets, but you would not
listen, declares the LORD.’ 20Hear the word of the LORD, all you exiles
k whom I sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon: 21[†]‘Thus says the LORD
of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah and
Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, l who are prophesying a lie to you in my
name: Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon, and he shall strike them down before your eyes. 22
m Because of
them n this curse shall be used by all the exiles from Judah in Babylon:
“The LORD make you like Zedekiah and Ahab, o whom the king of Babylon
roasted in the fire,” 23because they have done an outrageous thing in Israel,
p they have committed adultery with their neighbors’ wives, and p they have
spoken in my name lying words that I did not command them. q I am the
one who knows, q and I am witness, declares the LORD.’”
Shemaiah’s False Prophecy
24To r Shemaiah of Nehelam you shall say: 25[†]“Thus says the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel: You have sent letters in your name to all the people
who are in Jerusalem, and to s Zephaniah the son of t Maaseiah the priest,
and to all the priests, saying, 26‘The LORD has made you priest instead of
Jehoiada the priest, to have u charge in the house of the LORD v over every
madman who prophesies, to put him in w the stocks and neck irons.
27[†]Now why have you not rebuked Jeremiah x of Anathoth who is
prophesying to you? 28For he has sent to us in Babylon, saying, “Your exile
will be long; y build houses and live in them, and plant gardens and eat their
produce.”’”
29 s Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the hearing of Jeremiah the
prophet. 30
z Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah: 31[†]“Send to all
the exiles, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD concerning a Shemaiah of Nehelam:
Because a Shemaiah had prophesied to you b when I did not send him, and
has made you trust in a lie, 32therefore thus says the LORD: Behold, I will
punish a Shemaiah of Nehelam and his descendants. He shall not have
anyone living among this people, c and he shall not see the good that I will
do to my people, declares the LORD, d for he has spoken rebellion against
the LORD.’”
Restoration for Israel and Judah