JEREMIAH 31 [†] z “At that time, declares the LORD, a I will be the God of
all the clans of Israel, and they shall be my people.”
2[†] Thus says the LORD:
“The people who survived the sword
found grace in the wilderness;
b when Israel sought for rest,
3 the LORD appeared to him [1] from far away.
c I have loved you with an everlasting love;
therefore d I have continued e my faithfulness to you.
4[†] f Again I will build you, and you shall be built,
O virgin Israel!
g Again you shall adorn yourself with tambourines
and shall go forth in h the dance of the merrymakers.
5 i Again you shall plant vineyards
on the mountains of Samaria;
the planters shall plant
and shall enjoy the fruit.
6 For there shall be a day when watchmen will call
in j the hill country of Ephraim:
k ‘Arise, and let us go up to Zion,
to the LORD our God.’”
7 For thus says the LORD:
l “Sing aloud with gladness for Jacob,
and raise shouts for m the chief of the nations;
proclaim, give praise, and say,
n ‘O LORD, save your people,
the remnant of Israel.’
8 Behold, I will bring them o from the north country
and p gather them from q the farthest parts of the earth,
among them r the blind and the lame,
the pregnant woman and she who is in labor, together;
a great company, they shall return here.
9[†] s With weeping they shall come,
t and with pleas for mercy I will lead them back,
I will make them u walk by brooks of water,
v in a straight path in which they shall not stumble,
for w I am a father to Israel,
and Ephraim is x my firstborn.
10[†] “Hear the word of the LORD, O nations,
and declare it in the coastlands far away;
say, ‘He who scattered Israel will p gather him,
and will keep him y as a shepherd keeps his flock.’
11
z For the LORD has ransomed Jacob
and has redeemed him from a hands too strong for him.
12 They shall come and sing aloud on the height of Zion,
b and they shall be radiant c over the goodness of the LORD,
d over the grain, the wine, and the oil,
and over the young of the flock and the herd;
e their life shall be like a watered garden,
f and they shall languish no more.
13[†] g Then shall the young women rejoice in the dance,
and the young men and the old shall be merry.
h I will turn their mourning into joy;
I will comfort them, and give them gladness for sorrow.
14 i I will feast the soul of the priests with abundance,
and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness,
declares the LORD.”
15[†] Thus says the LORD:
j “A voice is heard in k Ramah,
lamentation and bitter weeping.
l Rachel is weeping for her children;
she refuses to be comforted for her children,
m because they are no more.”
16[†] Thus says the LORD:
“Keep your voice from weeping,
and your eyes from tears,
for there is a reward for your work,
declares the LORD,
and n they shall come back from the land of the enemy.
17 o There is hope for your future,
declares the LORD,
and your children shall come back to their own country.
18[†] I have heard p Ephraim grieving,
‘You have disciplined me, and I was disciplined,
like an untrained calf;
q bring me back that I may be restored,
for you are the LORD my God.
19 For after r I had turned away, I relented,
and after I was instructed, s I struck my thigh;
t I was ashamed, and I was confounded,
because I bore the disgrace of my youth.’
20 p Is Ephraim my dear son?
u Is he my darling child?
For as often as I speak against him,
I do remember him still.
v Therefore my heart [2] yearns for him;
I will surely have mercy on him,
declares the LORD.
21[†] w “Set up road markers for yourself;
make yourself guideposts;
x consider well the highway,
w the road by which you went.
Return, O virgin Israel,
return to these your cities.
22[†] y How long will you waver,
z O faithless daughter?
For the LORD has created a new thing on the earth:
a woman encircles a man.”
23[†]Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: “Once more they
shall use these words in the land of Judah and in its cities, a when I restore
their fortunes:
b “‘The LORD bless you, c O habitation of righteousness,
d O holy hill!’
24
e And Judah and all its cities shall dwell there together, and e the farmers
and those who wander with their flocks. 25For I will f satisfy the weary soul,
and every languishing soul I will replenish.”
26At this I awoke and looked, and my sleep was pleasant to me.
27
g “Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when h I will sow
the house of Israel and the house of Judah with i the seed of man and the
seed of beast. 28[†]And it shall come to pass that j as I have watched over
them k to pluck up and break down, to overthrow, destroy, and bring harm,
j so I will watch over them l to build and to plant, declares the LORD.
29[†]In
those days they shall no longer say:
m “‘The fathers have eaten sour grapes,
and the children’s teeth are set on edge.’
30
n But everyone shall die for his own iniquity. Each man who eats sour
grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge.
The New Covenant
31[†] o “Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will make
p a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, 32[†]not
like the covenant that I made with their fathers on the day when q I took
them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, my covenant that
they broke, r though I was their husband, declares the LORD.
33[†] s For this
is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,
declares the LORD: s I will put my law within them, and I will write it t on
their hearts. u And I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 34And
no longer shall each one teach his neighbor and each his brother, saying,
‘Know the LORD,’ v for they shall all know me, w from the least of them to
the greatest, declares the LORD. For x I will forgive their iniquity, and y I
will remember their sin no more.”
35[†] Thus says the LORD,
who z gives the sun for light by day
and a the fixed order of the moon and the stars for light by night,
who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar—
b the LORD of hosts is his name:
36
c “If this fixed order departs
from before me, declares the LORD,
then shall the offspring of Israel cease
from being a nation before me forever.”
37 Thus says the LORD:
“If the heavens above can be measured,
and the foundations of the earth below can be explored,
d then I will cast off all the offspring of Israel
for all that they have done,
declares the LORD.”
38[†] e “Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when the city
shall be rebuilt for the LORD f from the Tower of Hananel to g the Corner
Gate. 39 h And the measuring line shall go out farther, straight to the hill
Gareb, and shall then turn to Goah. 40
i The whole valley of the dead bodies
and the ashes, and all the fields as far as the j brook Kidron, to the corner of
k the Horse Gate toward the east, l shall be sacred to the LORD. m It shall not
be plucked up or overthrown anymore forever.”
Jeremiah Buys a Field During the Siege