JEREMIAH 34 [†]The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, when
c Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army d and all the kingdoms
of the earth under his dominion and all the peoples were fighting against
Jerusalem and all of its cities: 2“Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Go
and speak to e Zedekiah king of Judah and say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD:
f Behold, I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he
shall burn it with fire. 3[†] g You shall not escape from his hand but shall
surely be captured and delivered into his hand. g You shall see the king of
Babylon eye to eye and speak with him face to face. And you shall go to
Babylon.’ 4Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah king of Judah!
h Thus says the LORD concerning you: h ‘You shall not die by the sword.
5You shall die in peace. i And as spices were burned for your fathers, the
former kings who were before you, so people shall j burn spices for you
k and lament for you, saying, “Alas, lord!”’ For I have spoken the word,
declares the LORD.”
6[†]Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke all these words to Zedekiah king of
Judah, in Jerusalem, 7when the army of the king of Babylon was fighting
against Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were left, l Lachish
and m Azekah, n for these were the only o fortified cities of Judah that
remained.
8[†]The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, after King Zedekiah
p had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem q to make a
proclamation of liberty to them, 9
r that everyone should set free his Hebrew
slaves, male and female, s so that no one should enslave a Jew, his brother.
10And they obeyed, all the officials and all the people who had entered into
the covenant that everyone would set free his slave, male or female, so that
they would not be enslaved again. They obeyed and set them free. 11But
afterward they turned around and took back the male and female slaves
r they had set free, and brought them into subjection as slaves. 12The word
of the LORD came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 13[†]“Thus says the LORD,
the God of Israel: I myself made a covenant with your fathers when t I
brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, saying,
14[†] u ‘At the end of seven years each of you must set free the fellow
Hebrew who has been sold to you and has served you six years; r you must
set him free from your service.’ But v your fathers did not listen to me or
incline their ears to me. 15[†]You recently repented and did what was right
in my eyes q by proclaiming liberty, each to his neighbor, and w you made a
covenant before me in the x house that is called by my name, 16[†]but then
you turned around y and profaned my name when each of you took back his
male and female slaves, z whom you had set free according to their desire,
and you brought them into subjection to be your slaves.
17[†]“Therefore, thus says the LORD: You have not obeyed me q by
proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother and to his neighbor; a behold, I
proclaim to you liberty b to the sword, to pestilence, and to famine, declares
the LORD. c I will make you a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
18[†]And the men who transgressed my covenant and did not keep the terms
of w the covenant that they made before me, I will make them like [1] d the
calf that they cut in two and passed between its parts— 19the officials of
Judah, the officials of Jerusalem, e the eunuchs, the priests, and all the
people of the land who passed between the parts of the calf. 20And I will
give them into the hand of their enemies f and into the hand of those who
seek their lives. g Their dead bodies shall be food for the birds of the air and
the beasts of the earth. 21And h Zedekiah king of Judah and his officials I
will give into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those who seek
their lives, into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon i which has
withdrawn from you. 22Behold, j I will command, declares the LORD, and
will k bring them back to this city. k And they will fight against it and take it
and burn it with fire. l I will make the cities of Judah a desolation m without
inhabitant.”
The Obedience of the Rechabites