JEREMIAH 37 [†] u Zedekiah the son of Josiah, v whom Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah, reigned instead of
w Coniah the son of Jehoiakim. 2[†] x But neither he nor his servants nor the
people of the land listened to the words of the LORD that he spoke through
Jeremiah the prophet.
3King Zedekiah sent y Jehucal the son of z Shelemiah, and a Zephaniah
the priest, the son of b Maaseiah, to Jeremiah the prophet, saying, “Please
c pray for us to the LORD our God.” 4 d Now Jeremiah was still going in and
out among the people, e for he had not yet been put in prison. 5[†] f The
army of Pharaoh had come out of Egypt. And when g the Chaldeans who
were besieging Jerusalem heard news about them, h they withdrew from
Jerusalem.
6Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah the prophet: 7“Thus says
the LORD, God of Israel: Thus shall you say to the king of Judah who i sent
you to me to inquire of me, ‘Behold, j Pharaoh’s army that came to help you
is about to k return to Egypt, to its own land. 8And l the Chaldeans shall
come back and fight against this city. l They shall capture it and burn it with
fire. 9Thus says the LORD, Do not deceive yourselves, saying, “The
Chaldeans will surely go away from us,” for they will not go away.
10 m For
even if you should defeat the whole army of Chaldeans who are fighting
against you, and there remained of them only wounded men, every man in
his tent, they would rise up and l burn this city with fire.’”
Jeremiah Imprisoned
11Now when n the Chaldean army had withdrawn from Jerusalem at the
approach of Pharaoh’s army,
12Jeremiah set out from Jerusalem to go to
o the land of Benjamin p to receive his portion there q among the people.
13When he was at r the Benjamin Gate, a sentry there named Irijah the son
of s Shelemiah, son of Hananiah, seized Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
t “You are deserting to the Chaldeans.” 14[†]And Jeremiah said, “It is a lie; I
am not deserting to the Chaldeans.” But Irijah would not listen to him, and
seized Jeremiah and brought him to u the officials. 15[†]And the officials
were enraged at Jeremiah, and they beat him v and imprisoned him in the
house of Jonathan the secretary, for it had been made a prison.
16[†] w When Jeremiah had come to the dungeon cells and remained there
many days, 17[†]King Zedekiah sent for him and received him. The king
questioned him x secretly in his house and said, “Is there any word from the
LORD?” Jeremiah said, “There is.” Then he said, y “You shall be delivered
into the hand of the king of Babylon.” 18Jeremiah also said to King
Zedekiah, “What wrong have I done to you or your servants or this people,
v that you have put me in prison? 19
z Where are your prophets who
prophesied to you, saying, ‘The king of Babylon will not come against you
and against this land’? 20Now hear, please, O my lord the king: a let my
humble plea come before you and b do not send me back to the house of
Jonathan the secretary, lest I die there.” 21So King Zedekiah gave orders,
and they committed Jeremiah to c the court of the guard. And a loaf of bread
was given him daily from the bakers’ street, d until all the bread of the city
was gone. So Jeremiah remained in c the court of the guard.
Jeremiah Cast into the Cistern