JEREMIAH 49 [†] a Concerning the Ammonites.
Thus says the LORD:
“Has Israel no sons?
Has he no heir?
Why then has b Milcom c dispossessed Gad,
and his people settled in its cities?
2[†] Therefore, behold, the days are coming,
declares the LORD,
when I will cause d the battle cry to be heard
against e Rabbah of the Ammonites;
it shall become a desolate f mound,
and its villages shall be burned with fire;
then Israel shall dispossess those who dispossessed him,
says the LORD.
3[†] “Wail, O g Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste!
Cry out, O daughters of e Rabbah!
h Put on sackcloth,
lament, and run to and fro among the hedges!
For i Milcom shall go into exile,
j with his priests and his officials.
4 Why do you boast of your valleys, [1]
k O faithless daughter,
l who trusted in her treasures, saying,
‘Who will come against me?’
5[†] Behold, m I will bring terror upon you,
declares the Lord GOD of hosts,
from all who are around you,
and you shall be driven out, every man straight before him,
with none to gather the fugitives.
6[†]“But n afterward I will restore the fortunes of the Ammonites,
declares the LORD.”
Judgment on Edom
7[†]Concerning o Edom.
Thus says the LORD of hosts:
p “Is wisdom no more in p Teman?
q Has counsel perished from the prudent?
q Has their wisdom vanished?
8[†] r Flee, turn back, dwell in the depths,
O inhabitants of s Dedan!
For I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him,
t the time when I punish him.
9 u If grape gatherers came to you,
would they not leave v gleanings?
u If thieves came by night,
would they not destroy only enough for themselves?
10 w But I have stripped Esau bare;
u I have uncovered his hiding places,
and he is not able to conceal himself.
His children are destroyed, and his brothers,
and his neighbors; and x he is no more.
11[†] y Leave your fatherless children; I will keep them alive;
y and let your widows trust in me.”
12For thus says the LORD: z “If those who did not deserve to drink the cup
must drink it, a will you go unpunished? You shall not go unpunished, but
you must drink. 13[†] b For I have sworn by myself, declares the LORD, that
c Bozrah shall become d a horror, a taunt, a waste, and a curse, and all her
cities shall be perpetual wastes.”
14 e I have heard a message from the LORD,
and an envoy has been sent among the nations:
f “Gather yourselves together and come against her,
and rise up for battle!
15 For behold, I will make you small among the nations,
despised among mankind.
16 The horror you inspire has deceived you,
and the pride of your heart,
you who live in the clefts of the rock, [2]
who hold the height of the hill.
Though you g make your nest as high as the eagle’s,
I will bring you down from there,
declares the LORD.
17 h “Edom shall become a horror. i Everyone who passes by it will be
horrified i and will hiss because of all its disasters. 18 j As when Sodom and
Gomorrah and their k neighboring cities were overthrown, says the LORD,
l no man shall dwell there, l no man shall sojourn in her.
19 m Behold, n like a
lion coming up from o the jungle of the Jordan against a perennial pasture, I
will suddenly make him [3] run away from her. And I will appoint over her
whomever I choose. p For who is like me? q Who will summon me? r What
shepherd can stand before me? 20Therefore hear the plan that the LORD has
made against s Edom and the purposes that he has formed against the
inhabitants of t Teman: u Even the little ones of the flock shall be dragged
away. Surely their fold shall be appalled at their fate. 21At the sound of their
fall v the earth shall tremble; the sound of their cry shall be heard at the Red
Sea. 22Behold, w one shall mount up and fly swiftly like an eagle and spread
his wings against x Bozrah, and the heart of the warriors of Edom shall be
in that day like the heart y of a woman in her birth pains.”
Judgment on Damascus
23[†]Concerning z Damascus:
a “Hamath and b Arpad are confounded,
for they have heard bad news;
they melt in fear,
c they are troubled like the sea that cannot be quiet.
24[†] z Damascus has become feeble, d she turned to flee,
and panic seized her;
anguish and sorrows have taken hold of her,
as y of a woman in labor.
25 How is e the famous city not forsaken,
the city of my joy?
26 f Therefore her young men shall fall in her squares,
and all her soldiers shall be destroyed in that day,
declares the LORD of hosts.
27 And g I will kindle a fire in the wall of z Damascus,
and it shall devour the strongholds of h Ben-hadad.”
Judgment on Kedar and Hazor
28[†]Concerning i Kedar and the kingdoms of Hazor that Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon struck down.
Thus says the LORD:
j “Rise up, advance against i Kedar!
Destroy k the people of the east!
29
l Their tents and their flocks shall be taken,
their l curtains and all their goods;
their camels shall be led away from them,
and men shall cry to them: m ‘Terror on every side!’
30[†] n Flee, wander far away, dwell in the depths,
O inhabitants of Hazor!
declares the LORD.
For Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
has made a plan against you
and formed a purpose against you.
31 j “Rise up, advance against a nation o at ease,
p that dwells securely,
declares the LORD,
p that has no gates or bars,
that dwells alone.
32 q Their camels shall become plunder,
their herds of livestock a spoil.
r I will scatter to every wind
s those who cut the corners of their hair,
and I will bring their calamity
from every side of them,
33 Hazor shall become t a haunt of jackals,
an everlasting waste;
u no man shall dwell there;
u no man shall sojourn in her.”
declares the LORD.
Judgment on Elam
34[†]The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning
v Elam, in the beginning of the reign of w Zedekiah king of Judah.
35Thus says the LORD of hosts: “Behold, I will break x the bow of v Elam,
the mainstay of their might. 36[†]And I will bring upon v Elam the four
winds from the four quarters of heaven. And I will scatter them to all those
winds, and there shall be no nation to which those driven out of v Elam
shall not come. 37I will y terrify v Elam before their enemies and before
those who seek their life. I will bring disaster upon them, z my fierce anger,
declares the LORD. a I will send the sword after them, until I have consumed
them, 38and I will set my throne in v Elam and destroy their king and
officials, declares the LORD.
39[†]“But in the latter days b I will restore the fortunes of v Elam,
declares the LORD.”
Judgment on Babylon