JEREMIAH 26 [†] t In the beginning of the reign of u Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah, king of Judah, this word came from the LORD: 2“Thus says the
LORD: v Stand in the court of the LORD’s house, and speak to all the cities of
Judah that come to worship in the house of the LORD w all the words that I
command you to speak to them; x do not hold back a word. 3[†] y It may be
they will listen, and every one turn from his evil way, z that I may relent of
the disaster that I intend to do to them a because of their evil deeds. 4You
shall say to them, ‘Thus says the LORD: b If you will not listen to me, to
walk in my law that I have set before you, 5 c and to listen to the words of
my servants the prophets whom I send to you c urgently, c though you have
not listened, 6[†]then I will make this house d like Shiloh, and I will make
this city e a curse for all the nations of the earth.’”
7
f The priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah
speaking these words in the house of the LORD.
8And when Jeremiah had
finished speaking all that the LORD had commanded him to speak to all the
people, then f the priests and the prophets and all the people laid hold of
him, saying, “You shall die! 9[†]Why have you prophesied in the name of
the LORD, saying, ‘This house shall be d like Shiloh, and this city shall be
desolate, g without inhabitant’?” And all the people gathered around
Jeremiah in the house of the LORD.
10[†]When h the officials of Judah heard these things, they came up from
the king’s house to the house of the LORD and took their seat in the i entry
of the New Gate of the house of the LORD.
11[†]Then f the priests and the
prophets said to the officials and to all the people, j “This man deserves the
sentence of death, because he has prophesied against this city, as you have
heard with your own ears.”
12[†]Then Jeremiah spoke to all the officials and all the people, saying,
“The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and this city all the
words you have heard. 13Now therefore k mend your ways and your deeds,
l and obey the voice of the LORD your God, z and the LORD will relent of the
disaster that he has pronounced against you. 14
m But as for me, behold, I am
in your hands. Do with me as seems good and right to you. 15Only know for
certain that if you put me to death, n you will bring innocent blood upon
yourselves and upon this city and its inhabitants, for in truth the LORD sent
me to you to speak all these words in your ears.”
Jeremiah Spared from Death
16[†] o Then the officials and all the people said to the priests and the
prophets, p “This man does not deserve the sentence of death, for he has
spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God.” 17[†] q And certain of r the
elders of the land arose and spoke to all the assembled people, saying,
18[†]“Micah of Moresheth prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of
Judah, and said to all the people of Judah: ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts,
s “‘Zion shall be plowed as a field;
Jerusalem shall become a heap of ruins,
and the mountain of the house a wooded height.’
19[†]Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him to death? t Did he
not fear the LORD and entreat the favor of the LORD, u and did not the LORD
relent of the disaster that he had pronounced against them? v But we are
about to bring great disaster upon ourselves.”
20There was another man who prophesied in the name of the LORD, Uriah
the son of Shemaiah from w Kiriath-jearim. He prophesied against this city
and against this land in words like those of Jeremiah. 21And when x King
Jehoiakim, with all his warriors and all the officials, heard his words, the
king sought to put him to death. But when Uriah heard of it, he was afraid
and fled and escaped to Egypt. 22Then x King Jehoiakim sent to Egypt
certain men, y Elnathan the son of z Achbor and others with him, 23and they
took Uriah from Egypt and brought him to King Jehoiakim, a who struck
him down with the sword and dumped his dead body into the burial place of
the common people.
24But the hand of b Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah so
that he was not given over to the people to be put to death.
The Yoke of Nebuchadnezzar