JEREMIAH 19 [†]Thus says the LORD, “Go, buy c a potter’s earthenware
d flask, and take some of e the elders of the people and some of e the elders
of the priests, 2[†]and go out f to the Valley of the Son of Hinnom at the
entry of the Potsherd Gate, and proclaim there the words that I tell you.
3[†]You shall say, g ‘Hear the word of the LORD, h O kings of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem. Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel:
Behold, I am bringing such disaster upon this place that i the ears of
everyone who hears of it will tingle. 4[†] j Because the people have forsaken
me and have profaned this place by making offerings in it to other gods
whom neither they nor their fathers nor the kings of Judah have known;
k and because they have filled this place with the blood of innocents, 5
l and
have built the high places of Baal l to burn their sons in the fire as burnt
offerings to Baal, m which I did not command or decree, nor did it come
into my mind— 6therefore, n behold, days are coming, declares the LORD,
when this place shall no more be called Topheth, or o the Valley of the Son
of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter.
7[†]And in this place p I will make
void the plans of Judah and Jerusalem, q and will cause their people to fall
by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of those who seek their
life. r I will give their dead bodies for food to the birds of the air and to the
beasts of the earth. 8And I will make this city s a horror, s a thing to be
hissed at. Everyone who passes by it will be horrified and will hiss because
of all its wounds. 9[†] t And I will make them eat the flesh of their sons and
their daughters, and everyone shall eat the flesh of his neighbor u in the
siege and in the distress, with which their enemies and those who seek their
life afflict them.’
10[†]“Then v you shall break w the flask in the sight of the men who go
with you, 11and shall say to them, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts: So will I
break this people and this city, x as one breaks a potter’s vessel, y so that it
can never be mended. z Men shall bury in Topheth because there will be no
place else to bury.
12[†]Thus will I do to this place, declares the LORD, and
to its inhabitants, making this city a like Topheth. 13The houses of
Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah— b all the houses on whose
c roofs offerings have been offered d to all the host of heaven, and e drink
offerings have been poured out to other gods—shall be defiled a like the
place of Topheth.’”
14Then Jeremiah came from f Topheth, where the LORD had sent him to
prophesy, g and he stood in the court of the LORD’s house and said to all the
people: 15“Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, behold, I am
bringing upon this city and upon all its towns all the disaster that I have
pronounced against it, h because they have stiffened their neck, i refusing to
hear my words.”
Jeremiah Persecuted by Pashhur