JEREMIAH 17 [†]“The sin of Judah is written with r a pen of iron; with a
point of diamond it is engraved on s the tablet of their heart, and on t the
horns of their altars, 2while u their children remember their altars and their
v Asherim, w beside every green tree and on the high hills, 3 x on the
mountains in the open country. y Your wealth and all your treasures I will
give for spoil as the price of your high places for sin throughout all your
territory.
4You shall loosen your hand from your heritage that I gave to you,
z and I will make you serve your enemies in a land that you do not know,
a for in my anger a fire is kindled that shall burn forever.”
5[†] Thus says the LORD:
“Cursed is the man b who trusts in man
and makes flesh his strength, [1]
whose heart turns away from the LORD.
6[†] c He is like a shrub in the desert,
d and shall not see any good come.
He shall dwell in the parched places of the wilderness,
in e an uninhabited salt land.
7[†] f “Blessed is the man who trusts in the LORD,
g whose trust is the LORD.
8[†] h He is like a tree planted by water,
that sends out its roots by the stream,
and does not fear when heat comes,
for its leaves remain green,
and is not anxious in the year of drought,
for it does not cease to bear fruit.”
9[†] The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately sick;
who can understand it?
10
i “I the LORD search the heart
j and test the mind, [2]
k to give every man according to his ways,
according to the fruit of his deeds.”
11 Like the l partridge that gathers a brood that she did not hatch,
so is m he who gets riches but not by justice;
n in the midst of his days they will leave him,
o and at his end he will be a fool.
12[†] A glorious throne set on high from the beginning
is the place of our sanctuary.
13 O LORD, p the hope of Israel,
q all who forsake you shall be put to shame;
those who turn away from you [3] r shall be written in the earth,
for s they have forsaken t the LORD, the fountain of living water.
Jeremiah Prays for Deliverance
14[†] u Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be healed;
save me, and I shall be saved,
for v you are my praise.
15
w Behold, they say to me,
“Where is the word of the LORD?
Let it come!”
16[†] I have not run away from being your shepherd,
nor have I desired the day of sickness.
x You know x what came out of my lips;
it was before your face.
17[†] Be not a terror to me;
y you are my refuge in the day of disaster.
18 z Let those be put to shame who persecute me,
but let me not be put to shame;
z let them be dismayed,
but let me not be dismayed;
a bring upon them the day of disaster;
destroy them with double destruction!
Keep the Sabbath Holy
19Thus said the LORD to me: “Go and stand in the People’s Gate, by which
b the kings of Judah enter and by which they go out, and in all the gates of
Jerusalem, 20and say: ‘Hear the word of the LORD, b you kings of Judah,
and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter by these gates.
21Thus says the LORD: Take care for the sake of your lives, and c do not bear
a burden on the Sabbath day or bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem. 22And
do not carry a burden out of your houses on the Sabbath d or do any work,
but e keep the Sabbath day holy, as I commanded your fathers. 23Yet f they
did not listen or incline their ear, g but stiffened their neck, that they h might
not hear and receive instruction.
24[†]“‘But if you listen to me, declares the LORD, and c bring in no
burden by the gates of this city on the Sabbath day, but e keep the Sabbath
day holy and do no work on it, 25then i there shall enter by the gates of this
city kings and princes who sit on the throne of David, riding in chariots and
on horses, they and their officials, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. And this city shall be inhabited forever.
26And people shall come
from j the cities of Judah k and the places around Jerusalem, j from the land
of Benjamin, k from the Shephelah, from the hill country, k and from l the
Negeb, bringing m burnt offerings and sacrifices, grain offerings and
frankincense, and m bringing thank offerings to the house of the LORD.
27But if you do not listen to me, to e keep the Sabbath day holy, c and not to
bear a burden and enter by the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then I
will n kindle a fire in its gates, and it shall o devour the palaces of Jerusalem
and p shall not be quenched.’”
The Potter and the Clay
JEREMIAH 18 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 2“Arise, and
go down to q the potter’s house, and there I will let you hear my words.”
3So I went down to r the potter’s house, and there he was working at his
wheel. 4[†]And the vessel he was making of clay was s spoiled in the
potter’s hand, and t he reworked it into another vessel, as it seemed good to
the potter to do.
5Then the word of the LORD came to me: 6[†]“O house of Israel, u can I
not do with you as this potter has done? declares the LORD. v Behold, like
the clay in the potter’s hand, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel.
7[†]If at any time I declare concerning a nation or a kingdom, that I will
w pluck up and break down and destroy it, 8[†]and if that nation, concerning
which I have spoken, x turns from its evil, y I will relent of the disaster that I
intended to do to it. 9[†]And if at any time I declare concerning a nation or a
kingdom that I will w build and plant it, 10[†]and if it does evil in my sight,
not listening to my voice, then I will relent of the good that I had intended
to do to it. 11Now, therefore, say to the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem: ‘Thus says the LORD, Behold, I am shaping disaster against you
and devising a plan against you. z Return, every one from his evil way, and
a amend your ways and your deeds.’
12“But they say, b ‘That is in vain! We will follow our own plans, and
will every one act according to c the stubbornness of his evil heart.’
13[†] “Therefore thus says the LORD:
d Ask among the nations,
Who has heard the like of this?
The virgin Israel
has done e a very horrible thing.
14[†] Does the snow of Lebanon leave
the crags of Sirion? [1]
Do the mountain waters run dry, [2]
the cold flowing streams?
15 f But my people have forgotten me;
they make offerings to g false gods;
they made them stumble in their ways,
h in the ancient roads,
and to walk into side roads,
i not the highway,
16 making their land j a horror,
a thing j to be hissed at forever.
k Everyone who passes by it is horrified
l and shakes his head.
17 m Like the east wind n I will scatter them
before the enemy.
o I will show them my back, not my face,
in the day of their calamity.”
18[†]Then they said, p “Come, let us make plots against Jeremiah, q for
the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the
word from the prophet. r Come, let us strike him with the tongue, and let us
not pay attention to any of his words.”
19[†] Hear me, O LORD,
and s listen to the voice of my adversaries.
20 t Should good be repaid with evil?
Yet u they have dug a pit for my life.
v Remember how I stood before you
to speak good for them,
to turn away your wrath from them.
21 Therefore w deliver up their children to famine;
give them over to the power of the sword;
let their wives become childless x and widowed.
May their men meet death by pestilence,
their youths be struck down by the sword in battle.
22 y May a cry be heard from their houses,
when you bring the plunderer suddenly upon them!
For u they have dug a pit to take me
z and laid snares for my feet.
23 Yet a you, O LORD, know
all their plotting to kill me.
b Forgive not their iniquity,
nor blot out their sin from your sight.
Let them be overthrown before you;
deal with them in the time of your anger.
The Broken Flask