JEREMIAH 42 [†]Then y all the commanders of the forces, and z Johanan the
son of Kareah and Jezaniah the son of a Hoshaiah, and all the people b from
the least to the greatest, came near 2and said to Jeremiah the prophet, “Let
c our plea for mercy come before you, and d pray to the LORD your God for
us, for all e this remnant— f because we are left with but a few, as your eyes
see us— 3that g the LORD your God may show us the way we should go,
and the thing that we should do.” 4Jeremiah the prophet said to them, “I
have heard you. Behold, I will pray to the LORD your God according to your
request, and h whatever the LORD answers you I will tell you. h I will keep
nothing back from you.” 5Then they said to Jeremiah, i “May the LORD be a
true and j faithful witness against us k if we do not act according to all the
word l with which the LORD your God sends you to us. 6Whether it is good
or bad, we will obey the voice of the LORD our God to whom we are
sending you, m that it may be well with us when we obey the voice of the
LORD our God.”
7[†] n At the end of ten days the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah.
8Then he summoned z Johanan the son of Kareah and y all the commanders
of the forces who were with him, and all the people b from the least to the
greatest, 9and said to them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, o to
whom you sent me to present your plea for mercy before him: 10[†]If you
will remain in this land, p then I will build you up and not pull you down; I
will plant you, and not pluck you up; q for I relent of the disaster that I did
to you. 11[†] r Do not fear the king of Babylon, r of whom you are afraid.
s Do not fear him, declares the LORD, s for I am with you, to save you and to
deliver you from his hand. 12
t I will grant you mercy, that he may have
mercy on you and let you remain in your own land. 13[†] u But if you say,
‘We will not remain in this land,’ disobeying the voice of the LORD your
God 14and saying, ‘No, v we will go to the land of Egypt, where we shall
not see war or w hear the sound of the trumpet or x be hungry for bread, and
we will dwell there,’ 15then hear the word of the LORD, O remnant of Judah.
Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: y If you set your faces to
enter Egypt z and go to live there, 16then the sword a that you fear shall
overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine of which you are
afraid shall follow close after you to Egypt, b and there you shall die. 17All
the men who set their faces to go to Egypt to live there shall die by the
sword, by famine, and by pestilence. They shall have c no remnant or
survivor from the disaster that I will bring upon them.
18[†]“For thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel: d As my anger
and my wrath were poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so my wrath
will be poured out on you when you go to Egypt. e You shall become an
execration, a horror, a curse, and a taunt. You shall see this place no more.
19[†]The LORD has said to you, O remnant of Judah, f ‘Do not go to Egypt.’
g Know for a certainty that I have warned you this day 20that you have gone
astray at the cost of your lives. h For you sent me to the LORD your God,
saying, h ‘Pray for us to the LORD our God, and i whatever the LORD our
God says declare to us and we will do it.’ 21And I have this day declared it
to you, but you have not obeyed the voice of the LORD your God in
anything j that he sent me to tell you. 22 k Now therefore know for a
certainty that you shall die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence in the
place where you desire to go to live.”
Jeremiah Taken to Egypt
JEREMIAH 43 When Jeremiah finished speaking to all the people all these
words of the LORD their God, with which the LORD their God had sent him
to them, 2Azariah the son of l Hoshaiah and m Johanan the son of Kareah
and n all the insolent men said to Jeremiah, “You are telling a lie. The LORD
our God did not send you to say, o ‘Do not go to Egypt to live there,’ 3but
p Baruch the son of Neriah q has set you against us, r to deliver us into the
hand of the Chaldeans, that they may kill us or take us into exile in
Babylon.” 4[†]So m Johanan the son of Kareah and all s the commanders of
the forces and all the people did not obey the voice of the LORD, to remain
in the land of Judah. 5But Johanan the son of Kareah and all the
commanders of the forces took t all the remnant of Judah who had returned
to live in the land of Judah from all the nations to which they had been
driven— 6 u the men, the women, the children, v the princesses, and every
person whom w Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with
x Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan; also Jeremiah the prophet
and Baruch the son of Neriah. 7[†]And they came into the land of Egypt, for
they did not obey the voice of the LORD. And they arrived at y Tahpanhes.
8Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah in y Tahpanhes: 9[†]“Take
in your hands large stones and hide them in the mortar in the pavement that
is at the entrance to Pharaoh’s palace in y Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men
of Judah, 10and say to them, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel: Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon,
z my servant, a and I will set his throne above these stones that I have
hidden, and he will spread his royal canopy over them. 11He shall come
b and strike the land of Egypt, c giving over to the pestilence those who are
doomed to the pestilence, to captivity those who are doomed to captivity,
and to the sword those who are doomed to the sword. 12[†] d I shall kindle a
fire e in the temples of the gods of Egypt, and he shall burn them f and carry
them away captive. g And he shall clean the land of Egypt g as a shepherd
cleans his cloak of vermin, and he shall go away from there in peace.
13[†]He shall break the h obelisks of Heliopolis, which is in the land of
Egypt, e and the temples of the gods of Egypt he shall burn with fire.’”
Judgment for Idolatry