JEREMIAH 25 [†] e The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the
people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of
Judah (that was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon), 2which
Jeremiah the prophet spoke to all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem: 3“For twenty-three years, f from the thirteenth year of Josiah
the son of Amon, king of Judah, to this day, the word of the LORD has come
to me, and I have spoken g persistently to you, h but you have not listened.
4
h You have neither listened nor inclined your ears to hear, although the
LORD g persistently sent to you all his servants the prophets, 5[†]saying,
i ‘Turn now, every one of you, j from his evil way and evil deeds, and
k dwell upon the land that the LORD has given to you and your fathers from
of old and forever.
6 l Do not go after other gods to serve and worship them,
m or provoke me to anger m with the work of your hands. Then I will do you
no harm.’ 7
m Yet you have not listened to me, declares the LORD, m that you
might provoke me to anger m with the work of your hands to your own
harm.
8[†]“Therefore thus says the LORD of hosts: Because you have not obeyed
my words, 9
n behold, I will send for all the tribes of the north, declares the
LORD, and for Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, o my servant, and I
will bring them against this land and its inhabitants, and against all these
surrounding nations. I will devote them to destruction, p and make them a
horror, a hissing, and an everlasting desolation. 10Moreover, q I will banish
from them the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
bridegroom and the voice of the bride, r the grinding of the millstones and
s the light of the lamp. 11[†] p This whole land shall become a ruin and a
waste, and t these nations shall serve the king of Babylon u seventy years.
12[†]Then after u seventy years are completed, v I will punish the king of
Babylon and that nation, v the land of the Chaldeans, for their iniquity,
declares the LORD, v making the land an everlasting waste. 13I will bring
upon that land all the words that I have uttered against it, everything written
w in this book, which Jeremiah prophesied against all the nations. 14[†] x For
many nations x and great kings shall make slaves even of them, y and I will
recompense them according to their deeds and the work of their hands.”
The Cup of the LORD’s Wrath
15[†]Thus the LORD, the God of Israel, said to me: z “Take from my hand
this cup of the wine of wrath, and make all the nations to whom I send you
drink it. 16They shall drink and stagger and be crazed because of a the
sword that I am sending among them.”
17[†]So I took the cup from the LORD’s hand, b and made all the nations
to whom the LORD sent me drink it: 18 c Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, its
kings and officials, d to make them a desolation and a waste, a hissing and a
curse, as at this day; 19[†] e Pharaoh king of Egypt, his servants, his officials,
all his people, 20and f all the mixed tribes among them; all the kings of g the
land of Uz and all the kings of h the land of the Philistines ( h Ashkelon,
h Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of i Ashdod); 21
j Edom, k Moab, and the
sons of l Ammon; 22all the kings of m Tyre, all the kings of m Sidon, and the
kings of the coastland across n the sea; 23[†] o Dedan, p Tema, q Buz, and all
who cut r the corners of their hair; 24all the s kings of Arabia and all the
kings of f the mixed tribes who dwell in the desert; 25all the kings of Zimri,
all the kings of t Elam, and all the kings of u Media; 26all the kings of v the
north, far and near, one after another, and all the kingdoms of the world that
are on the face of the earth. And after them the king of w Babylon [1] shall
drink.
27“Then you shall say to them, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel: x Drink, be drunk and vomit, fall and rise no more, because of y the
sword that I am sending among you.’
28“And if they refuse to accept the cup from your hand to drink, then you
shall say to them, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts: z You must drink! 29For
behold, a I begin to work disaster at the city that is called by my name, and
shall you go unpunished? You shall not go unpunished, y for I am
summoning a sword against all the inhabitants of the earth, declares the
LORD of hosts.’
30“You, therefore, shall prophesy against them all these words, and say to
them:
b “‘The LORD will roar from on high,
and from his holy habitation utter his voice;
he will roar mightily against his fold,
c and shout, like those who tread grapes,
against all the inhabitants of the earth.
31[†] The clamor will resound to the ends of the earth,
for d the LORD has an indictment against the nations;
e he is entering into judgment with all flesh,
and the wicked he will put to the sword,
declares the LORD.’
32 “Thus says the LORD of hosts:
Behold, disaster is going forth
from nation to nation,
f and a great tempest is stirring
g from the farthest parts of the earth!
33
h “And those pierced by the LORD on that day shall extend from one
end of the earth to the other. i They shall not be lamented, j or gathered, or
buried; j they shall be dung on the surface of the ground.
34
k “Wail, l you shepherds, and cry out,
m and roll in ashes, you lords of the flock,
for the days of your slaughter and dispersion have come,
and you shall fall like a choice vessel.
35 No refuge will remain n for the shepherds,
nor escape for the lords of the flock.
36 A voice—the cry n of the shepherds,
o and the wail of the lords of the flock!
For the LORD is laying waste their pasture,
37 p and the peaceful folds are devastated
q because of the fierce anger of the LORD.
38[†] Like a lion r he has left his lair,
for their land has become a waste
because of s the sword of the oppressor,
q and because of his fierce anger.”
Jeremiah Threatened with Death