JOB 16 [†]Then Job answered and said:
2 “I have heard e many such things;
f miserable comforters are you all.
3 Shall g windy words have an end?
Or what provokes you that you answer?
4 I also could speak as you do,
if you were in my place;
I could join words together against you
and h shake my head at you.
5 I could strengthen you with my mouth,
and the solace of my lips would assuage your pain.
6 “If I speak, my pain is not assuaged,
and if I forbear, how much of it leaves me?
7 Surely now God has worn me out;
i he has [1] made desolate all my company.
8[†] And he has shriveled me up,
which is j a witness against me,
and my k leanness has risen up against me;
it testifies to my face.
9 He has l torn me in his wrath m and hated me;
he has n gnashed his teeth at me;
my adversary sharpens his eyes against me.
10 Men have o gaped at me with their mouth;
they have p struck me insolently on the cheek;
they q mass themselves together against me.
11 God gives me up to the ungodly
and casts me into the hands of the wicked.
12[†] I was at ease, and he broke me apart;
he seized me by the neck and dashed me to pieces;
he set me up as his r target;
13 his s archers surround me.
He slashes open my kidneys t and does not spare;
he u pours out my gall on the ground.
14 He breaks me with v breach upon breach;
he w runs upon me like a warrior.
15[†] I have sewed x sackcloth upon my skin
and have laid y my strength z in the dust.
16[†] My face is red with weeping,
and on my eyelids is a deep darkness,
17 although there is no b violence in my hands,
and my prayer is pure.
18 “O earth, c cover not my blood,
and let my d cry find no resting place.
19[†] Even now, behold, my e witness is in heaven,
and he who testifies for me is f on high.
20 My friends g scorn me;
my eye pours out tears to God,
21 that he would h argue the case of a man with God,
as [2] a son of man does with his neighbor.
22 For when a few years have come
I shall go the way i from which I shall not return.
Job Continues: Where Then Is My Hope?
JOB 17 “My spirit is broken; my days are j extinct;
k the graveyard is ready for me.
2 Surely there are mockers about me,
and my eye dwells on their l provocation.
3 “Lay down a pledge for me with you;
who is there who will put up m security for me?
4 Since you have closed their hearts to understanding,
therefore you will not let them triumph.
5[†] He who informs against his friends to get a share of their property
—
the n eyes of his children will fail.
6 “He has made me o a byword of the peoples,
and I am one before whom men spit.
7[†] My p eye has grown dim from vexation,
and all my members are like q a shadow.
8 The upright are r appalled at this,
and the innocent stirs himself up against the godless.
9 Yet the righteous holds to his way,
and he who has s clean hands grows stronger and stronger.
10[†] But you, t come on again, all of you,
and I shall not find a wise man among you.
11 My u days are past; my plans are broken off,
the desires of my heart.
12 They v make night into day:
‘The light,’ they say, ‘is near to the darkness.’ [1]
13 If I hope for w Sheol as x my house,
if I make my bed in darkness,
14 if I say to the pit, ‘You are my father,’
and to the worm, ‘My mother,’ or ‘My sister,’
15 where then is my hope?
Who will see my hope?
16 Will it go down to the bars of w Sheol?
Shall we y descend together z into the dust?”
Bildad Speaks: God Punishes the Wicked