JOB 28 [†] “Surely there is a mine for silver,
and a place for gold that they y refine.
2 Iron is taken out of the earth,
and copper is smelted from the ore.
3 Man puts an end to darkness
and searches out to the farthest limit
the ore in z gloom and a deep darkness.
4 He opens shafts in a valley away from where anyone lives;
they are forgotten by travelers;
they hang in the air, far away from mankind; they swing to and fro.
5 As for the earth, b out of it comes bread,
but underneath it is turned up as by fire.
6 Its stones are the place of c sapphires, [1]
and it has dust of gold.
7[†] “That path no bird of prey knows,
and the falcon’s eye has not seen it.
8 d The proud beasts have not trodden it;
e the lion has not passed over it.
9 “Man puts his hand to f the flinty rock
and overturns mountains by the roots.
10[†] He cuts out channels in the rocks,
and his eye sees every precious thing.
11[†] He dams up the streams so that they do not trickle,
and the thing that is hidden he brings out to light.
12[†] g “But where shall wisdom be found?
And where is the place of understanding?
13 Man does not know its worth,
and it is not found in h the land of the living.
14 i The deep says, ‘It is not in me,’
and the sea says, ‘It is not with me.’
15[†] It j cannot be bought for gold,
and silver cannot be weighed as its price.
16 It cannot be valued in k the gold of l Ophir,
in precious m onyx or n sapphire.
17 Gold and glass cannot equal it,
nor can it be exchanged for jewels of fine gold.
18 No mention shall be made of o coral or of crystal;
the price of wisdom is above o p pearls.
19 q The topaz of Ethiopia cannot equal it,
nor can it be valued in pure gold.
20 “From where, then, does wisdom come?
And where is the place of understanding?
21[†] It is hidden from the eyes of r all living
and concealed from the birds of the air.
22[†] s Abaddon and Death say,
‘We have heard a rumor of it with our ears.’
23[†] t “God understands the way to it,
and he knows its place.
24 For he u looks to the ends of the earth
and sees everything under the heavens.
25 When he v gave to the wind its weight
and apportioned the waters by measure,
26 when he made a decree for the rain
and w a way for the lightning of the thunder,
27 then he saw it and declared it;
he established it, and searched it out.
28 And he said to man,
‘Behold, x the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom,
and to y turn away from evil is understanding.’”
Job’s Summary Defense