JOB 9 [†]Then Job answered and said:
2 “Truly I know that it is so:
But how can a man be z in the right before God?
3[†] If one wished to a contend with him,
one could not answer him once in a thousand times.
4 He is b wise in heart and mighty in strength
—who has c hardened himself against him, and succeeded?—
5 he who removes mountains, and they know it not,
when he overturns them in his anger,
6 who d shakes the earth out of its place,
and e its pillars tremble;
7 who commands the sun, and it does not rise;
who seals up the stars;
8 who alone f stretched out the heavens
and trampled the waves of the sea;
9 who g made h the Bear and i Orion,
the Pleiades j and the chambers of the south;
10 who does k great things beyond searching out,
and marvelous things beyond number.
11 Behold, he passes by me, and I l see him not;
he moves on, but I do not perceive him.
12 Behold, he snatches away; m who can turn him back?
n Who will say to him, ‘What are you doing?’
13[†] “God will not turn back his anger;
beneath him bowed the helpers of o Rahab.
14
p How then can I q answer him,
choosing my words with him?
15[†] r Though I am in the right, I cannot answer him;
I must s appeal for mercy to my accuser. [1]
16 If I summoned him and he answered me,
I would not believe that he was listening to my voice.
17 For he crushes me with a tempest
and multiplies my wounds t without cause;
18 he will not let me get my breath,
but fills me with bitterness.
19 If it is a contest of u strength, behold, he is mighty!
If it is a matter of justice, who can v summon him? [2]
20[†] Though I am in the right, w my own mouth would condemn me;
though I am blameless, he would prove me perverse.
21[†] I am x blameless; I regard not myself;
I y loathe my life.
22[†] It is all one; therefore I say,
‘He z destroys both the blameless and the wicked.’
23 When a disaster brings sudden death,
he mocks at the calamity [3] of the innocent.
24 b The earth is given into the hand of the wicked;
he c covers the faces of its judges—
d if it is not he, who then is it?
25 “My e days are swifter than f a runner;
they flee away; they see no good.
26 They go by like g skiffs of reed,
like h an eagle swooping on the prey.
27 If I say, i ‘I will forget my complaint,
I will put off my sad face, and j be of good cheer,’
28 I become k afraid of all my suffering,
for I know you will not l hold me innocent.
29 I shall be m condemned;
why then do I labor in vain?
30 If I wash myself with snow
and n cleanse my hands with lye,
31 yet you will plunge me into a pit,
and my own clothes will o abhor me.
32[†] For he is not a man, as I am, that I might answer him,
that we should p come to trial together.
33 q There is no [4] arbiter between us,
who might lay his hand on us both.
34 r Let him take his s rod away from me,
and let t not dread of him terrify me.
35 Then I would speak without fear of him,
for I am not so in myself.
Job Continues: A Plea to God