JOB 22 [†]Then z Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said:
2[†] a “Can a man be profitable to God?
Surely he who is wise is profitable to himself.
3 Is it any pleasure to the Almighty if you are in the right,
or is it gain to him if you b make your ways blameless?
4 Is it for your fear of him that he reproves you
and c enters into judgment with you?
5[†] Is not your evil abundant?
There is no end to your iniquities.
6 For you have d exacted pledges of your brothers for nothing
e and stripped the naked of their clothing.
7 You have given no water to the weary to drink,
and you have f withheld bread from the hungry.
8 g The man with power possessed the land,
and h the favored man lived in it.
9[†] You have i sent widows away empty,
and j the arms of k the fatherless were crushed.
10 Therefore l snares are all around you,
and sudden terror overwhelms you,
11 or m darkness, so that you cannot see,
and a n flood of o water covers you.
12 “Is not God high in the heavens?
See p the highest stars, how lofty they are!
13[†] But you say, q ‘What does God know?
Can he judge through r the deep darkness?
14
s Thick clouds veil him, so that he does not see,
and he walks on the vault of heaven.’
15 Will you keep to the old way
that wicked men have trod?
16[†] They were snatched away t before their time;
their foundation was washed away.
17 They said to God, u ‘Depart from us,’
and v ‘What can the Almighty do to us?’ [1]
18 Yet he filled their houses with good things—
but w the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
19 x The righteous see it and are glad;
the innocent one y mocks at them,
20 saying, ‘Surely our adversaries are cut off,
and what they left z the fire has consumed.’
21[†] a “Agree with God, and b be at peace;
thereby good will come to you.
22 Receive instruction from c his mouth,
and d lay up his words in your heart.
23 If you e return to the Almighty you will be f built up;
if you g remove injustice far from your tents,
24 if you lay gold in h the dust,
and gold of i Ophir among the stones of the torrent-bed,
25 then the Almighty will be your gold
and your precious silver.
26 For then you j will delight yourself in the Almighty
and k lift up your face to God.
27 You will l make your prayer to him, and he will hear you,
and you will m pay your vows.
28 You will decide on a matter, and it will be established for you,
and n light will shine on your ways.
29 For when they are humbled you say, ‘It is because of pride’; [2]
but he saves o the lowly.
30[†] He p delivers even the one who is not innocent,
who will be delivered through q the cleanness of your hands.”
Job Replies: Where Is God?