JOB 6 [†]Then Job answered and said:
2 “Oh that my vexation were weighed,
and all my calamity laid in the balances!
3 For then it would be heavier than z the sand of the sea;
therefore my words have been rash.
4 For a the arrows of the Almighty are in me;
my spirit drinks their poison;
the terrors of God are arrayed against me.
5 Does the wild donkey bray when he has grass,
or the ox low over his fodder?
6 Can that which is tasteless be eaten without salt,
or is there any taste in the juice of the mallow? [1]
7 My appetite refuses to touch them;
they are as food that is loathsome to me. [2]
8[†] “Oh that I might have my request,
and that God would fulfill my hope,
9 that it would b please God to crush me,
that he would let loose his hand and cut me off!
10 This would be my comfort;
I would even exult [3] in pain c unsparing,
for I have not denied the words of d the Holy One.
11 What is my strength, that I should wait?
And what is my end, that I should be patient?
12 Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh bronze?
13 Have I any help in me,
when resource is driven from me?
14[†] “He who e withholds [4] kindness from a f friend
forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
15[†] My g brothers are h treacherous as a torrent-bed,
as torrential i streams that pass away,
16 which are dark with ice,
and where the snow hides itself.
17 When they melt, they disappear;
when it is hot, they vanish from their place.
18 The caravans turn aside from their course;
they go up into j the waste and perish.
19 The caravans of k Tema look,
the travelers of l Sheba hope.
20 They are m ashamed because they were confident;
they come there and are m disappointed.
21 For you have now become nothing;
you see my calamity and are afraid.
22 Have I said, ‘Make me a gift’?
Or, ‘From your wealth offer a bribe for me’?
23 Or, ‘Deliver me from the adversary’s hand’?
Or, ‘Redeem me from the hand of n the ruthless’?
24 “Teach me, and I will be silent;
make me understand how I have gone astray.
25[†] How forceful are upright words!
But what does reproof from you reprove?
26 Do you think that you can reprove words,
when the speech of a despairing man is o wind?
27 You would even p cast lots over the fatherless,
and bargain over your friend.
28[†] “But now, be pleased to look at me,
for I will not lie to your face.
29
q Please turn; let no injustice be done.
Turn now; my vindication is at stake.
30 Is there any injustice on my tongue?
Cannot my palate discern the cause of calamity?
Job Continues: My Life Has No Hope
JOB 7 “Has not man r a hard service on earth,
and are not his s days like the days of a hired hand?
2 Like a slave who longs for t the shadow,
and like u a hired hand who looks for his v wages,
3 so I am allotted months of w emptiness,
x and nights of misery are apportioned to me.
4 y When I lie down I say, ‘When shall I arise?’
But the night is long,
and I am full of tossing till the dawn.
5 My flesh is clothed with z worms and a dirt;
my skin hardens, then b breaks out afresh.
6 My days are c swifter than d a weaver’s shuttle
and come to their end without hope.
7 “Remember that my life is a e breath;
my eye will never again see good.
8 f The eye of him who sees me will behold me no more;
while your eyes are on me, g I shall be gone.
9 As h the cloud fades and vanishes,
so he who i goes down to Sheol does not come up;
10 he j returns no more to his house,
nor does his k place know him anymore.
11[†] “Therefore I will not l restrain my mouth;
I will speak in the anguish of my spirit;
I will m complain in n the bitterness of my soul.
12[†] Am I the sea, or o a sea monster,
that you set a guard over me?
13 p When I say, ‘My bed will comfort me,
my couch will ease my complaint,’
14 then you scare me with dreams
and terrify me with visions,
15 so that I would choose strangling
and death rather than my q bones.
16[†] I r loathe my life; I would not live forever.
s Leave me alone, for my days are t a breath.
17[†] u What is man, that you make so much of him,
and that you set your heart on him,
18
v visit him every morning
and w test him every moment?
19 How long will you not x look away from me,
nor leave me alone till I swallow my spit?
20 If I sin, what do I do to you, you watcher of mankind?
Why have you made me y your mark?
Why have I become a burden to you?
21 Why do you not pardon my transgression
and take away my iniquity?
For now I shall lie in z the earth;
you will a seek me, b but I shall not be.”
Bildad Speaks: Job Should Repent