JOEL 3 [†] [1] “For behold, i in those days and at that time, when I restore
the fortunes of Judah and Jerusalem, 2[†] j I will gather all the nations and
bring them down to the Valley of Jehoshaphat. And k I will enter into
judgment with them there, on behalf of my people and my heritage Israel,
because they have scattered them among the nations and have divided up
my land, 3[†]and l have cast lots for my people, and have traded a boy for a
prostitute, and have sold a girl for wine and have drunk it.
4[†]“What are you to me, m O Tyre and Sidon, and all n the regions of
Philistia? Are you paying me back for something? If you are paying me
back, o I will return your payment on your own head swiftly and speedily.
5For p you have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried my rich
treasures into your temples. [2] 6[†]You have sold q the people of Judah and
Jerusalem to the Greeks in order to remove them far from their own border.
7[†]Behold, I will stir them up from the place to which you have sold them,
and o I will return your payment on your own head. 8I will sell your sons
and your daughters into the hand of the people of Judah, and they will sell
them to the r Sabeans, to a nation far away, for the LORD has spoken.”
9[†] Proclaim this among the nations:
s Consecrate for war; [3]
stir up the mighty men.
Let all the men of war draw near;
let them come up.
10[†] t Beat your plowshares into swords,
and t your pruning hooks into spears;
let the weak say, “I am a warrior.”
11 u Hasten and come,
all you surrounding nations,
and gather yourselves there.
v Bring down your warriors, O LORD.
12 Let the nations stir themselves up
and come up to w the Valley of Jehoshaphat;
x for there I will sit to judge
all the surrounding nations.
13[†] y Put in the sickle,
z for the harvest is ripe.
a Go in, tread,
a for the winepress is full.
The vats overflow,
for their evil is great.
14[†] Multitudes, multitudes,
in the valley of decision!
For b the day of the LORD is near
in the valley of decision.
15
c The sun and the moon are darkened,
and the stars withdraw their shining.
16[†] d The LORD roars from Zion,
and d utters his voice from Jerusalem,
e and the heavens and the earth quake.
But the LORD is f a refuge to his people,
a stronghold to the people of Israel.
The Glorious Future of Judah
17[†] g “So you shall know that I am the LORD your God,
h who dwells in Zion, i my holy mountain.
And Jerusalem shall be holy,
and j strangers shall never again pass through it.
18[†] “And in that day
k the mountains shall drip sweet wine,
and the hills shall flow with milk,
and l all the streambeds of Judah
shall flow with water;
m and a fountain shall come forth from the house of the LORD
and water the Valley of n Shittim.
19[†] o “Egypt shall become a desolation
and p Edom a desolate wilderness,
q for the violence done to the people of Judah,
because they have shed innocent blood in their land.
20[†] r But Judah shall be inhabited forever,
and Jerusalem to all generations.
21[†] s I will avenge their blood,
blood I have not avenged, [4]
h for the LORD dwells in Zion.”
Study Notes for Joel
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:1–2:17 The Judgment against Judah and the Day of the
Lord. This first part of Joel introduces the Lord’s judgment in the form of
a locust infestation, drought, and the coming of a great army. These
events on the “day of the LORD” are followed by a call to seek the Lord.
1:1–20 Locust Invasion: Forerunner of the Day of the Lord. The first unit
(vv. 1–14) describes the devastation that has come upon Judah. This is the
reason for the call to lament in the second unit (vv. 15–20).
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:1 The word . . . came to. This message is from God. The
prophet is given the privilege of delivering that message to the people.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:2 Elders likely refers to older members of the
community.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:3 Tell your children. See Deut. 6:4–9.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:4 The locust is a kind of grasshopper. Under the right
conditions they travel in large swarms and destroy all plant life in their path
(cutting . . . swarming . . . hopping . . . destroying).
FACT
The desert locust has been a destructive force that has plagued
agricultural production for thousands of years. Winds from the Sahara
have been known to carry them across oceans. Their devastation of crops
often leads to famine. Joel compares them to a great army.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:5 drunkards, drinkers of wine. Both groups are
unaware of the coming chaos. They will have no sweet wine to drink when
the locusts destroy the vines.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:6 Locusts are compared to a nation, powerful as a great
army.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:7 The vine and fig tree are symbols of a prosperous and
peaceful life for Israel, which the Lord who provides it sees as his property.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:8 bridegroom of her youth. The people are called to
grieve as deeply as a betrothed virgin whose promised husband dies before
they are married.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:9 offering. Nothing is left for the offerings that
accompany the daily burnt offering (see Lev. 1:3–17). priests mourn. Their
loss is personal, since they would ordinarily eat a portion of the offering.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:10 ground mourns . . . oil languishes. Joel poetically
personifies these things as experiencing grief. The presence of grain, wine,
and oil is evidence of God’s covenant blessing, and their absence is
evidence of his judgment.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:13 The commands to put on and lament imitate the
actions of the virgin (v. 8). The priests lament because the offering is
withheld.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:14 Consecrate and gather are further tasks for the
priests. a fast . . . cry out. Old Testament fasts are a sign of mourning,
repentance, and humility. They are a way of seeking God’s help.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:15 The day of the LORD is a major theme in Joel. It can
refer to a particular act of judgment, like the devastation of the locusts, or it
can refer to the future final judgment. “That day” can also be a blessing. For
God’s people, it is also associated with his presence, blessing, and salvation.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:17 seed shrivels . . . clods. The precise meaning of these
three words is uncertain. Nevertheless, it is clear from what follows that a
drought has also come upon the land.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:18 the flocks of sheep suffer. Creation suffers because of
Israel’s guilt.
JOEL—NOTE ON 1:19–20 To you, O LORD, I call. The devastation brought
by the Lord can be relieved only by him.
2:1–17 Army Invasion: The Arrival of the Day of the Lord. Joel describes
the coming of an army, whose arrival may yet be prevented by a
wholehearted return to the Lord. Verses 1–11 describe the coming of this
great army, and vv. 12–17 describe the command to return to the Lord.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:1 Zion is the place of the Lord’s throne. The name can
refer to the temple area or to all of Jerusalem.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:3 Fire devours . . . flame burns. The army is associated
with destructive fire. like the garden of Eden . . . a desolate wilderness.
The destructive power of this “great . . . people” (v. 2) can only be
compared to the devastation of God’s original creation by mankind’s fall
(Genesis 3).
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:4–5 like . . . horses. Joel compares the threatened locust
plague to a powerful army.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:7–9 they do not swerve. . . . They do not jostle. This
army cannot be moved from its assigned course.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:10 quakes before them . . . tremble. . . . darkened. Only
the day of the Lord could produce this effect on the earth. In many cases in
the Prophets, the Hebrew verb for “tremble” was associated with the end of
the age and God’s final judgment.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:11 utters his voice. Thunder is associated with the events
of v. 10. his army. The force that brings such dread and terror is under
God’s command. He who executes probably refers to the army, which
carries out the Lord’s command.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:12 Yet even now . . . return. There is still time for the
people to repent.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:13 Rend your hearts is an expression of internal
anguish. This response, along with wholehearted devotion (v. 12), is similar
to the circumcised heart described in Deut. 30:6.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:14 Who knows. The sovereign God acts according to his
own purposes. Turn and relent suggests that the Lord, in keeping with his
revealed character, will bring blessing instead of disaster.
JOEL
The name Joel means “Yahweh is God.” Little is known about the
prophet, who was probably from Judah. It is likely that he ministered
during a national calamity sometime after Judah returned from exile in
Babylon. The primary theme in the book of Joel is the “day of the
LORD”—a time when the presence of the Lord will bring both judgment
and deliverance. Joel teaches that, while the day of the Lord will bring
destruction on the nations, it will also be a time of salvation for God’s
people. Judah will be the means through which God pours out his Spirit
on all people (2:28–32), and he will preserve them against all who seek
to destroy them. (Joel 2:11–14)
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:16 Consecrate the congregation. As in 1:14, all
members of the community assemble for worship, preparing to call upon
the Lord with a fast. Even nursing infants and newlyweds are required to
participate.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:17 The place of prayer was between the entrance to the
temple and the altar. Your people is an appeal to God’s covenantal care for
his people. A byword means a common saying, often used in scorn. See
also esv footnote.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:18–3:21 The Mercy of the Lord and Judgment
against the Nations. The change from prophetic utterances to more of a
conversational tone marks the beginning of the second half of Joel.
2:18–32 Mercy: The Lord Responds by Restoring His People. The Lord
answers the prayer of v. 17. He restores the reputation of his people (vv. 18–
20), the land (vv. 21–27), and his presence through pouring out the Spirit
(vv. 28–32).
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:18 jealous. Jealousy here is a deep devotion that leads the
Lord to intervene, saving his people for the sake of his own glory.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:20 The northerner is probably a final apocalyptic enemy
of Israel. The words vanguard . . . rear guard show that destruction is
complete and final.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:21 The “foul smell” (v. 20) of corpses is all that remains
of the great enemy. This contrasts with the great things done by the Lord,
whose acts of salvation are the reason for the command to fear not.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:22 The Hebrew verb represented by are green is found
elsewhere in Scripture only at Gen. 1:11. Perhaps Joel wants his readers to
imagine the restoration of the land to an Eden-like state.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:25 Being human often means bearing loss. Yet the same
Lord who brings disaster when his people sin is also the Lord of mercy and
abundant grace. He is fully able to give back what was taken: I will restore
to you.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:27 You shall know. The great purpose of the nation’s
trauma is that they will know God’s presence, know that he is the covenant-
keeping God, and know that he will remove their shame.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:28–29 pour out my Spirit. Just as God will send life-
giving rain (vv. 18–27), so also will he pour out his Spirit on his people in
the future. all flesh. All God’s people will share this experience. All will
prophesy and dream dreams and see visions.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:30–31 Some scholars believe that the events of judgment
described here, which did not take place at Pentecost (see notes on Acts
2:17; 2:19–21), will still take place sometime in the future, at the return of
Christ. Others believe that these verses should be understood as prophetic
symbolism for God’s judgment, and that no specific literal fulfillment is
intended.
JOEL—NOTE ON 2:32 everyone. Salvation is extended beyond the
devastation caused by the locusts. calls on the name. Paul quotes this in
Rom. 10:13. He understood these verses to describe events in the messianic
age, when Jews and Gentiles alike would be saved.
FACT
The sun shall be turned to darkness could be describing a solar eclipse,
but more broadly this refers to the disintegration of the cosmos, which
was understood by Jews to be a sign of God’s judgment. Note that when
Jesus was on the cross, the earth became dark for three hours, indicating
God’s judgment (see Mark 15:33).
3:1–21 Judgment: The Lord’ s Judgment against the Nations and His
Dwelling with His People. The Lord provides reasons for judgment (vv. 1–
8), a description of the climactic judgment on the day of the Lord (vv. 9–
16), and certain hope of the Lord dwelling with his people (vv. 17–21).
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:1 In those days recalls the events of 2:28–32, particularly
the day of the Lord.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:2 all the nations. That is, all oppressors of God’s people.
Valley of Jehoshaphat refers to a place of final judgment. Scattered refers
to deportation associated with exile.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:3 cast lots for my people. In order to take them away as
slaves.
FACT
Slave trading (3:3) was a big business during wartime. Prisoners of war
were regularly sold to slave dealers, who often took them far from their
native lands. Most likely they would then be sold to the highest bidder.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:4 Tyre and Sidon were Phoenician cities along the
Mediterranean coast. Relations between Israel and Phoenicia were
occasionally good. Philistia, on the other hand, was a longtime enemy of
Israel. I will return your payment on your own head. God will judge, or
pay back, the Phoenicians and Philistines for stealing Judah’s silver and
gold.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:6 sold . . . to the Greeks. Both the Philistines and the
Phoenicians are accused of selling slaves to the Edomites.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:7–8 stir them up. The enslaved will become the
enslavers. Sidon was destroyed by Artaxerxes III in 343 B.C., and Tyre was
defeated by Alexander the Great in 332. Sabeans. Most commentators
identify this people as inhabitants of the land of Sheba or Saba, located far
away in southern Arabia.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:9 Consecrate. The nations are told to spiritually prepare
themselves for war, unaware that the Lord of heaven and earth is their
opponent.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:10 Beat your plowshares into swords. The warfare
preparation is so thorough that agricultural tools must be transformed into
weapons. the weak. The great need for soldiers means that even those unfit
for battle must become warriors.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:13 harvest is ripe. . . . winepress is full. . . . vats
overflow. The nations’ evil is compared to grain and wine, and judgment to
harvest and wine making. Their evil is full-grown. It is time to harvest (that
is, to judge).
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:14 Multitudes. All the people of the world, standing
before the Lord for judgment. valley of decision. The Valley of Jehoshaphat
(see note on v. 2). the day of the LORD is near. The nations will soon be
judged.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:16 roars . . . utters his voice. God’s voice alone causes
the world to quake. refuge, stronghold. Amid the confusion, the people of
God are secure.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:17 you shall know that I am the LORD your God.
Judgment and salvation lead to knowledge of the covenant Lord and the
removal of the people’s shame. Zion stands for the promise of God’s
presence among his people. Jerusalem shall be holy. Where God is
present, all is purified. strangers. Those who do not worship the Lord.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:18 in that day. That is, the day of the Lord (2:2; 3:1).
wine . . . milk . . . water. This and other descriptions of God’s provision
recall the earlier absence of these things. a fountain . . . from the house of
the LORD. Compare Ezek. 47:1–13.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:19 Egypt and Edom were ancient enemies of Israel,
representing all of those opposed to God’s people. Desolation was
prophesied against Egypt and Edom. The nations shed, that is, “poured out”
blood, but the Lord will “pour out” his Spirit.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:20 The Lord’s residence in Zion ensures that his people
live in unending security.
JOEL—NOTE ON 3:21 The verse brings together the two primary themes of
Joel: judgment on the day of the Lord, and the fact that the Lord dwells in
Zion.
A m o s
(return to table of contents)
Amos 1 • Amos 2 • Amos 3 • Amos 4 • Amos 5 • Amos 6 • Amos 7
Amos 8 • Amos 9
•
Introduction to Amos
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Near East at the Time of Amos
Global Message of Amos
Amos in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Amos
The Global Message of Amos for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Amos
Introduction to Amos
Timeline
Author and Date
Amos was not a prophet by profession (see 1:1; 7:14–15) but nevertheless was
entrusted with bringing a message from the Lord to the northern kingdom of
Israel. He prophesied sometime between 793–739 B.C., probably nearer the end
of that period.
Theme
The theme of Amos is the universal justice of God. The Israelites clearly
expected a “day of the Lord” when all their enemies would be judged (1:2–
2:5). What they were not prepared for was that they too would be judged (2:6–
9:10). In fact, they would be held more accountable than their neighbors.
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
After about 780–745 B.C., the Assyrian Empire was unable to continue the
pressure it had put on the nations of the Canaanite coast during the previous
century. At this same time, both Judah and Israel were blessed with fairly stable
governments. As a result of these two factors, the two nations (especially
Israel) were experiencing a time of wealth and prosperity. But what the
Israelites saw as the beginning of a new “Golden Age” was really the end for
them. It was Amos’s unhappy task to tell them of God’s coming judgment.
Within just a few years Israel would no longer exist as a nation. They would
continue to exist as a scattered people only by God’s unmerited grace (9:11–
15). “The day of the Lord,” far from being a day of blessing, was going to be a
day of darkness. By 722 B.C. Assyria would regain its strength, and the
Israelites would be conquered and exiled.
Key Themes
1. The Lord is the Creator of the universe. Therefore his ethical norms are
universal, and all people are subject to judgment in light of them.
2. Justice and righteousness in the treatment of other people are the key
evidences of a right relationship to the Lord.
3. Religious observances in the absence of social justice are disgusting to
God.
4. Israel’s covenant with the Lord did not guarantee special protection for
them when they broke that covenant. Rather, it meant that they would be
held to a higher standard of obedience.
5. Thus, the “day of the LORD” would not be a time of miraculous
deliverance for unrepentant Israel. Rather, it would be a time of terrible
destruction.
6. A faithful remnant of Israel would be preserved and would someday see
glorious restoration and blessing.
Outline
I. Superscription (1:1)
II. Oracles of Judgment (1:2–6:14)
III. Visions of Judgment (7:1–9:15)
The Near East at the Time of Amos
c. 750 B.C.
Amos likely prophesied to Israel during the decades just before the fall of
Samaria to the Assyrian Empire. The resurgence of this ancient empire
dominated much of the politics of the ancient Near East from the time of
Jeroboam until the end of the seventh century B.C. Assyria would eventually
engulf nearly the entire Near East, from Ur to Ararat to Egypt.
The Global Message of Amos
The message of Amos lands on the global church today with as much force
and necessity as it landed on the people of God 2,700 years ago. The key
idea in Amos is that God is just and impartial and will judge not only the
nations but also his own people for their life of ease and apathy amid
human suffering. To prosperous nations around the world today, and
particularly prosperous Christians in those nations, the prophecy of Amos is
a clear call for active engagement with the poor and afflicted, especially
among God’s people.
Amos in Redemptive History
The purpose of prosperity. God created humanity to flourish. When sin
entered the world, the ground was cursed so that only through toil and
hardship would mankind’s work prove fruitful (Gen. 3:17–19). Yet in his
great kindness, or as a hint of the prosperity to come in the new earth, or to
test his people, or for other reasons, God often allows human beings to
flourish in terms of material prosperity. During such times of prosperity,
God’s people are called to embody his character, gladly extending mercy,
compassion, and generosity to those in need. God had called Abraham in
order that his descendants, the children of Israel, might exercise precisely
such mercy and justice, so that they would be a light to the nations of the
world (Gen. 12:1–3; compare Amos 3:2).
Israel’ s misuse of prosperity. In Israel and Judah during the eighth
century B.C., at the time of Amos’s prophecy, the people of God were
prospering materially. Yet as was so often the case down through Israel’s
history, they failed to love one another as they had been called to do (Amos
3:10; 5:7, 12; 8:4). God had redeemed Israel in mercy from Egypt (2:10;
3:1), and the Israelites were now to act in mercy toward one another
accordingly. Yet, lazily indulging in God’s gift of prosperity, their worship
of God had turned hollow (5:21–23; compare 4:4–5) and heartfelt concern
for one another had withered (2:6–7).
Judgment for Israel’ s lack of mercy. Because of all this, the Lord will
exile his people (Amos 5:27; 7:17) and will bring upon them the “day of the
Lord,” a day of climactic judgment. More than any other prophet, Amos
describes this coming day of judgment in terms of darkness. “Why would
you have the day of the LORD? It is darkness, and not light. . . . Is not the
day of the LORD darkness, and not light, and gloom with no brightness in
it?” (5:18, 20; compare 4:13; 5:8). Toward the end of Amos we even hear
the Lord say regarding the day of final judgment, “I will make the sun go
down at noon and darken the earth in broad daylight” (8:9).
Ultimate prosperity in the new earth. In the next verse we are told that
this cosmic darkening will be linked with mourning that is “like the
mourning for an only son” (Amos 8:10). This is an arresting passage in
Amos’s prophecy because it describes precisely what took place when Jesus
hung on the cross seven centuries after Amos lived: the earth grew dark at
noon, for three hours, signifying God’s judgment, as an only son, God’ s
only Son, perished (Mark 15:33; John 3:16). Amos’s prophecy then
concludes with a deeply comforting promise of restoration through
faithfulness to David (Amos 9:11–15). Through this restoration God’s
people will be reinstated in the land, and “the mountains shall drip sweet
wine, and all the hills shall flow with it” (9:13).
On the cross, Jesus experienced the judgment of the prophetic day of the
Lord for all those around the world who trust in him. These believers “from
all tribes and peoples and languages” (Rev. 7:9) will one day enter into the
lavish abundance described in Amos 9, a restored paradise, a new earth—a
true and final Eden.
Universal Themes in Amos
God’ s impartial justice. The Lord does not overlook injustice on the part of
his own people simply because they are his. Indeed, God’s covenant
relationship makes justice and righteousness in the lives of his people all
the more crucial, for they are representing the Lord to the nations (see Rom.
2:17–24). Thus when his people “trample on the needy and bring the poor
of the land to an end” (Amos 8:4), God will certainly not exempt them from
the judgment that such selfishness deserves. Amos reminds the global
church of the commitment to justice that is embedded in the very character
of God.
The dangers of wealth. “Woe to those who are at ease in Zion,” say the
Lord in Amos 6. “Woe to those who lie on beds of ivory and stretch
themselves out on their couches . . . who drink wine in bowls and anoint
themselves with the finest oils” (6:1, 4, 6). Not only are God’s people living
in luxurious ease, however, but in their self-satisfied greed they are also
trampling on the needs of the poor, dealing deceitfully in business
transactions, and profaning the sabbath to make more money (8:4–6). Such
is the tendency of the human heart when prosperity comes. While material
prosperity is a blessing from the Lord (Prov. 10:22) and is appropriately
earned by those who work diligently and wisely (Prov. 21:5), the
accumulation of wealth tends to lead to a variety of temptations and sins (1
Tim. 6:9–10). Material wealth is to be received gratefully and yet must
never displace God as the center of our affections—and the main practical
way to keep wealth in its proper place is to be generous toward those in
need, especially in light of the generosity God has shown us in Christ (2
Cor. 8:9; compare 2 Cor. 9:11).
The Global Message of Amos for Today
The prophecy of Amos carries an urgent message for the global church in
the twenty-first century. Where God has brought material blessing to his
people through honest hard work and diligence, such blessing should be
received gratefully and enjoyed. Yet in light of massive worldwide needs
such as poverty, lack of clean water, malnutrition, and inadequate medical
care, material blessing granted to some believers must go out to those parts
of the world where help is needed. To do anything less is to tragically
imitate the people in Amos’s day who neglected the poor among them. Such
neglect deserves, and will receive, God’s judgment.
The church must never presume upon God’s favor. His justice is
universal. He will deal in perfect justice with those who claim his love and
compassion but fail to extend that love and compassion in concrete ways to
others. As those who have been shown mercy, may we as the church
universal love our neighbors, both near and far, with the radical, self-giving
love shown to us in the gospel. “Be imitators of God, as beloved children.
And walk in love, as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us” (Eph. 5:1–
2).