JOHN 10 [†]“Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter the sheepfold
by the door but climbs in by another way, that man is a thief and a robber.
2But he who enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. 3[†]To him the
gatekeeper opens. The sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by
name and leads them out. 4When he has brought out all his own, he goes
before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. 5 y A
stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him, for they do not
know the voice of strangers.” 6This figure of speech Jesus z used with them,
but they a did not understand what he was saying to them.
7[†]So Jesus again said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, b I am the
door of the sheep. 8[†]All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but
the sheep did not listen to them. 9[†]I am the door. If anyone enters by me,
c he will be saved and will go in and out and d find pasture. 10[†]The thief
comes only to steal and e kill and destroy. I came that they may have life
and have it abundantly.
11[†] f I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd
g lays down his life for the sheep. 12He who is h a hired hand and not a
shepherd, who does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming and i leaves
the sheep and flees, and the wolf snatches them and j scatters them. 13He
flees because k he is a hired hand and l cares nothing for the sheep. 14 m I am
the good shepherd. n I know my own and o my own know me, 15 p just as the
Father knows me and I know the Father; and q I lay down my life for the
sheep. 16[†]And r I have other sheep that are not of this fold. s I must bring
them also, and t they will listen to my voice. So there will be u one flock,
v one shepherd. 17[†] w For this reason the Father loves me, x because y I lay
down my life that I may take it up again. 18 z No one takes it from me, but
y I lay it down a of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down, and b I
have authority to take it up again. c This charge I have received from my
Father.”
19 d There was again a division among the Jews because of these words.
20[†]Many of them said, e “He has a demon, and f is insane; why listen to
him?” 21Others said, “These are not the words of one who is oppressed by a
demon. g Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?”
I and the Father Are One
22[†]At that time the Feast of Dedication took place at Jerusalem. It was
winter,
23[†]and Jesus was walking in the temple, h in the colonnade of
Solomon. 24So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, “How long
will you keep us in suspense? If you are i the Christ, j tell us plainly.”
25Jesus answered them, “I told you, and you do not believe. k The works
that I do l in my Father’s name bear witness about me, 26[†]but m you do not
believe because you are not among my sheep. 27 n My sheep hear my voice,
and I know them, and they follow me. 28 o I give them eternal life, and
p they will never perish, and q no one will snatch them out of my hand.
29My Father, r who has given them to me, [1] s is greater than all, and no one
is able to snatch them out of t the Father’s hand. 30[†] u I and the Father are
one.”
31[†] v The Jews picked up stones again to stone him. 32Jesus answered
them, “I have shown you many good works from the Father; for which of
them are you going to stone me?” 33The Jews answered him, “It is not for a
good work that we are going to stone you but w for blasphemy, because you,
being a man, x make yourself God.” 34[†]Jesus answered them, “Is it not
written in y your Law, z ‘I said, you are gods’? 35If he called them gods to
whom the word of God came—and Scripture cannot be a broken— 36[†]do
you say of him whom b the Father consecrated and c sent into the world,
‘You are blaspheming,’ because d I said, ‘I am the Son of God’? 37[†] e If I
am not doing the works of my Father, then do not believe me; 38but if I do
them, f even though you do not believe me, believe the works, that you may
know and understand that g the Father is in me and I am in the Father.”
39
h Again they sought to arrest him, but he escaped from their hands.
40He went away again across the Jordan to the place i where John had
been baptizing at first, and there he remained. 41And many came to him.
And they said, “John did no sign, but j everything that John said about this
man was true.” 42And k many believed in him there.
The Death of Lazarus