JOHN 13 [†]Now n before o the Feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that
p his hour had come q to depart out of this world to the Father, r having
loved s his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end. 2During
supper, when t the devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot,
Simon’s son, to betray him, 3Jesus, knowing u that the Father had given all
things into his hands, and that v he had come from God and w was going
back to God, 4rose from supper. He laid aside his outer garments, and taking
a towel, x tied it around his waist. 5Then he y poured water into a basin and
began to wash the disciples’ feet and to wipe them with the towel that was
wrapped around him. 6He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Lord, do
you wash my feet?” 7
z Jesus answered him, “What I am doing a you do not
understand now, but afterward you will understand.” 8[†] b Peter said to him,
“You shall never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him, c “If I do not wash
you, you have no share with me.” 9[†]Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, not
my feet only but also my hands and my head!” 10Jesus said to him, “The
one who has bathed does not need to wash, d except for his feet, [1] but is
completely clean. And e you [2] are clean, f but not every one of you.”
11 g For he knew who was to betray him; that was why he said, “Not all of
you are clean.”
12When he had washed their feet and h put on his outer garments and
resumed his place, he said to them, i “Do you understand what I have done
to you? 13 j You call me k Teacher and Lord, and you are right, for so I am.
14[†]If I then, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, l you also
ought to wash one another’s feet. 15For I have given you an example, m that
you also should do just as I have done to you. 16Truly, truly, I say to you, n a
servant [3] is not greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the
one who sent him. 17If you know these things, o blessed are you if you do
them. 18[†] p I am not speaking of all of you; I know q whom I have chosen.
But r the Scripture will be fulfilled, [4] s ‘He who ate my bread has lifted his
heel against me.’ 19[†] t I am telling you this now, before it takes place, that
when it does take place you may believe that I am he. 20[†]Truly, truly, I say
to you, u whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever
receives me receives the one who sent me.”
One of You Will Betray Me
21[†]After saying these things, v Jesus was troubled in his spirit, and
testified, w “Truly, truly, I say to you, x one of you will betray me.” 22 y The
disciples looked at one another, uncertain of whom he spoke. 23[†] z One of
his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was reclining at table a at Jesus’ side, [5]
24so Simon Peter motioned to him to ask Jesus [6] of whom he was
speaking. 25
b So that disciple, c leaning back against Jesus, said to him,
“Lord, who is it?” 26Jesus answered, d “It is he to whom I will give this
morsel of bread e when I have dipped it.” So when he had dipped the
morsel, f he gave it to Judas, g the son of Simon Iscariot. 27[†]Then after he
had taken the morsel, h Satan entered into him. Jesus said to him, i “What
you are going to do, do quickly.” 28Now no one at the table knew why he
said this to him. 29Some thought that, j because Judas had the moneybag,
Jesus was telling him, “Buy what we need k for the feast,” or that he should
l give something to the poor.
30So, after receiving the morsel of bread, he
immediately went out. m And it was night.
A New Commandment
31[†]When he had gone out, Jesus said, n “Now is the Son of Man glorified,
and o God is glorified in him. 32If God is glorified in him, p God will also
glorify him in himself, and q glorify him at once. 33Little children, r yet a
little while I am with you. You will seek me, and just s as I said to the Jews,
so now I also say to you, ‘Where I am going you cannot come.’ 34[†] t A
new commandment u I give to you, v that you love one another: w just as I
have loved you, you also are to love one another.
35 x By this all people will
know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”
Jesus Foretells Peter’s Denial
36Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” y Jesus answered
him, “Where I am going z you cannot follow me now, a but you will follow
afterward.” 37
b Peter said to him, “Lord, why can I not follow you now? I
will lay down my life for you.” 38[†]Jesus answered, “Will you lay down
your life for me? Truly, truly, I say to you, c the rooster will not crow till
you have denied me three times.
I Am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life