JOHN 11 [†]Now a certain man was ill, Lazarus of Bethany, the village of
l Mary and her sister Martha. 2 m It was Mary who anointed the Lord with
ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was ill.
3So the sisters sent to him, saying, “Lord, n he whom you love is ill.”
4[†]But when Jesus heard it he said, o “This illness does not lead to death. It
is for p the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through
it.”
5[†]Now q Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus. 6So, when he
heard that Lazarus [1] was ill, r he stayed two days longer in the place where
he was. 7Then after this he said to the disciples, s “Let us go to Judea
again.” 8The disciples said to him, t “Rabbi, u the Jews were just now
seeking to stone you, and are you going there again?” 9[†]Jesus answered,
v “Are there not twelve hours in the day? w If anyone walks in the day, he
does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. 10But x if anyone
walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not x in him.” 11[†]After
saying these things, he said to them, “Our friend Lazarus y has fallen asleep,
but I go to awaken him.” 12The disciples said to him, “Lord, if he has fallen
asleep, he will recover.” 13Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they
thought that he meant taking rest in sleep. 14Then Jesus told them plainly,
“Lazarus has died, 15and for your sake I am glad that I was not there, so that
you may believe. But let us go to him.” 16[†] z So Thomas, called the
Twin, [2] said to his fellow disciples, “Let us also go, a that we may die with
him.”
I Am the Resurrection and the Life
17Now when Jesus came, he found that Lazarus had already been in the
tomb b four days. 18Bethany was near Jerusalem, about two miles [3] off,
19and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary c to console them
concerning their brother.
20 d So when Martha heard that Jesus was coming,
she went and met him, but Mary remained seated in the house. 21Martha
said to e Jesus, “Lord, f if you had been here, my brother would not have
died. 22But even now I know that whatever you ask from God, g God will
give you.” 23Jesus said to her, “Your brother will rise again.” 24[†] h Martha
said to him, “I know that he will rise again in i the resurrection on the last
day.” 25[†]Jesus said to her, j “I am the resurrection and k the life. [4]
Whoever believes in me, l though he die, m yet shall he live, 26[†]and
everyone who lives and believes in me n shall never die. Do you believe
this?” 27[†]She said to him, “Yes, Lord; o I believe that p you are the Christ,
the Son of God, q who is coming into the world.”
Jesus Weeps
28[†]When she had said this, she went and called her sister Mary, saying in
private, r “The Teacher is here and is calling for you.” 29And when she
heard it, she rose quickly and went to him. 30Now Jesus had not yet come
into the village, but was still in the place where Martha had met him.
31When the Jews s who were with her in the house, consoling her, saw
Mary rise quickly and go out, they followed her, supposing that she was
going to the tomb to weep there. 32Now when Mary came to where Jesus
was and saw him, she fell at his feet, saying to him, t “Lord, if you had been
here, my brother would not have died.” 33[†]When Jesus saw her weeping,
and the Jews who had come with her also weeping, he u was deeply
moved [5] in his spirit and v greatly troubled. 34And he said, “Where have
you laid him?” They said to him, “Lord, come and see.” 35[†] w Jesus wept.
36So the Jews said, “See x how he loved him!” 37But some of them said,
“Could not he y who opened the eyes of the blind man z also have kept this
man from dying?”
Jesus Raises Lazarus
38Then Jesus, a deeply moved again, came to the tomb. It was b a cave, and
c a stone lay against it. 39Jesus said, “Take away the stone.” Martha, the
sister of the dead man, said to him, “Lord, by this time there will be an
odor, for d he has been dead four days.” 40Jesus said to her, e “Did I not tell
you that if you believed you would see f the glory of God?” 41So they took
away the stone. And Jesus g lifted up his eyes and said, “Father, I thank you
that you have heard me. 42 h I knew that you always hear me, but I said this
i on account of the people standing around, j that they may believe that you
sent me.” 43When he had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice,
“Lazarus, come out.” 44[†] k The man who had died came out, l his hands
and feet bound with linen strips, and m his face wrapped with a cloth. Jesus
said to them, “Unbind him, and let him go.”
The Plot to Kill Jesus
45 n Many of the Jews therefore, o who had come with Mary and p had seen
what he did, believed in him, 46but some of them went to the Pharisees and
told them what Jesus had done. 47[†]So the chief priests and the Pharisees
q gathered r the council and said, s “What are we to do? For this man
performs many signs. 48[†]If we let him go on like this, everyone will
believe in him, and t the Romans will come and take away both our u place
and our nation.” 49[†]But one of them, v Caiaphas, w who was high priest
that year, said to them, “You know nothing at all. 50[†]Nor do you
understand that x it is better for you that one man should die for the people,
not that the whole nation should perish.” 51He did not say this of his own
accord, but y being high priest that year z he prophesied that Jesus would die
for the nation, 52[†]and a not for the nation only, but also b to gather into
one the children of God who are scattered abroad. 53So from that day on
they c made plans to put him to death.
54Jesus therefore d no longer walked openly among the Jews, but went
from there to the region near the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, and
there he stayed with the disciples.
55[†]Now e the Passover of the Jews was at hand, and f many went up
from the country to Jerusalem before the Passover g to purify themselves.
56
h They were looking for [6] Jesus and saying to one another as they stood
in the temple, “What do you think? That he will not come to the feast at
all?” 57Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if
anyone knew where he was, he should let them know, so that they might
arrest him.
Mary Anoints Jesus at Bethany