JOSHUA 18 [†]Then the whole congregation of the people of Israel
assembled at p Shiloh and set up q the tent of meeting there. The land lay
subdued before them.
2There remained among the people of Israel seven tribes whose
inheritance had not yet been apportioned. 3So Joshua said to the people of
Israel, r “How long will you put off going in to take possession of the land,
which the LORD, the God of your fathers, has given you? 4Provide three
men from each tribe, and I will send them out that they may set out and go
up and down the land. They shall write a description of it with a view to
their inheritances, and then come to me. 5They shall divide it into seven
portions. s Judah shall continue in his territory on the south, t and the house
of Joseph shall continue in their territory on the north. 6And you shall
describe the land in seven divisions and bring the description here to me.
u And I will cast lots for you here before the LORD our God. 7[†] v The
Levites have no portion among you, for the priesthood of the LORD is their
heritage. w And Gad and Reuben and half the tribe of Manasseh have
received their inheritance beyond the Jordan eastward, which Moses the
servant of the LORD gave them.”
8So the men arose and went, and Joshua charged those who went to write
the description of the land, saying, “Go up and down in the land and write a
description and return to me. And I will cast lots for you here before the
LORD in Shiloh.” 9[†]So the men went and passed up and down in the land
and wrote in a book a description of it by towns in seven divisions. Then
they came to Joshua to the camp at Shiloh, 10and Joshua x cast lots for them
in Shiloh before the LORD. And there Joshua apportioned the land to the
people of Israel, y to each his portion.
The Inheritance for Benjamin
11[†]The lot of the tribe of the people of Benjamin according to its clans
came up, and the territory allotted to it fell between the people of Judah and
the people of Joseph. 12
z On the north side their boundary began at the
Jordan. a Then the boundary goes up to the shoulder north of Jericho, then
up through the hill country westward, and it ends at the wilderness of
b Beth-aven. 13From there the boundary passes along southward in the
direction of Luz, to the shoulder of c Luz (that is, Bethel), then the
boundary goes down to d Ataroth-addar, on the mountain that lies south of
Lower e Beth-horon. 14Then the boundary goes in another direction, turning
on the f western side southward from the mountain that lies to the south,
opposite Beth-horon, and it ends at Kiriath-baal ( g that is, Kiriath-jearim), a
city belonging to the people of Judah. This forms the western side. 15And
the southern side begins at the outskirts of Kiriath-jearim. And the boundary
goes from there to Ephron, [1] g to the spring of the waters of Nephtoah.
16Then the boundary goes down to the border of the mountain that
overlooks h the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, which is at the north end of
the Valley of i Rephaim. And it then goes down the h Valley of Hinnom,
south of the shoulder of the Jebusites, and downward to j En-rogel. 17Then
it bends in a northerly direction going on to En-shemesh, and from there
goes to Geliloth, which is opposite the ascent of Adummim. Then it goes
down to k the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben, 18and passing on to the
north of l the shoulder of Beth-arabah [2] it goes down to l the Arabah.
19Then the boundary passes on to the north of the shoulder of k Beth-
hoglah. And the boundary ends at the northern bay of m the Salt Sea, at the
south end of the Jordan: this is the southern border.
20The Jordan forms its
boundary on the eastern side. This is the inheritance of the people of
Benjamin, according to their clans, boundary by boundary all around.
21Now the cities of the tribe of the people of Benjamin according to their
clans were n Jericho, Beth-hoglah, Emek-keziz, 22Beth-arabah, Zemaraim,
Bethel, 23Avvim, Parah, Ophrah, 24Chephar-ammoni, Ophni, Geba—twelve
cities with their villages: 25Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth, 26Mizpeh, Chephirah,
Mozah, 27Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah, 28Zela, Haeleph, o Jebus [3] (that is,
Jerusalem), Gibeah [4] and Kiriath-jearim [5]—fourteen cities with their
villages. This is the inheritance of the people of Benjamin according to its
clans.
The Inheritance for Simeon