JOSHUA 10 [†]As soon as Adoni-zedek, king of Jerusalem, heard how
Joshua had captured Ai and had devoted it to destruction, [1] m doing to Ai
and its king n as he had done to Jericho and its king, and o how the
inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were among them,
2[†] p he [2] feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, like one of the
royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all its men were
warriors. 3So Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent to Hoham king of
Hebron, to Piram king of Jarmuth, to Japhia king of Lachish, and to Debir
king of Eglon, saying, 4“Come up to me and help me, and let us strike
Gibeon. For q it has made peace with Joshua and with the people of Israel.”
5[†]Then the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of
Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon,
r gathered their forces and went up with all their armies and encamped
against Gibeon and made war against it.
6And the men of Gibeon sent to Joshua s at the camp in Gilgal, saying,
“Do not relax your hand from your servants. Come up to us quickly and
save us and help us, for all the kings of the Amorites who dwell in the hill
country are gathered against us.” 7So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he and
t all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valor.
8[†]And
the LORD said to Joshua, u “Do not fear them, for I have given them into
your hands. v Not a man of them shall stand before you.” 9[†]So Joshua
came upon them suddenly, having marched up all night from Gilgal.
10[†] w And the LORD threw them into a panic before Israel, who [3] struck
them with a great blow at Gibeon and chased them by the way of x the
ascent of Beth-horon and struck them as far as Azekah and Makkedah.
11[†]And as they fled before Israel, while they were x going down the ascent
of Beth-horon, y the LORD threw down large stones from heaven on them as
far as Azekah, and they died. There were more who died because of the
hailstones than the sons of Israel killed with the sword.
12[†]At that time Joshua spoke to the LORD in the day when the LORD
gave the Amorites over to the sons of Israel, and he said in the sight of
Israel,
z “Sun, stand still at Gibeon,
and moon, in the Valley of Aijalon.”
13 And the sun stood still, and the moon stopped,
until the nation took vengeance on their enemies.
Is this not written in the Book of Jashar? The sun stopped in the midst of
heaven and did not hurry to set for about a whole day.
14 a There has been no
day like it before or since, when the LORD heeded the voice of a man, for
b the LORD fought for Israel.
15[†]So c Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to the camp at Gilgal.
Five Amorite Kings Executed
16These five kings fled and hid themselves in the cave at d Makkedah.
17And it was told to Joshua, “The five kings have been found, hidden in the
cave at Makkedah.” 18And Joshua said, “Roll large stones against the mouth
of the cave and set men by it to guard them, 19but do not stay there
yourselves. Pursue your enemies; e attack their rear guard. Do not let them
enter their cities, for the LORD your God has given them into your hand.”
20When Joshua and the sons of Israel had finished striking them with a
great blow f until they were wiped out, and when the remnant that remained
of them had entered into the fortified cities, 21then all the people returned
safe to Joshua in the camp at Makkedah. g Not a man moved his tongue
against any of the people of Israel.
22Then Joshua said, “Open the mouth of the cave and bring those five
kings out to me from the cave.” 23And they did so, and brought those five
kings out to him from the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron,
the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon. 24[†]And
when they brought those kings out to Joshua, Joshua summoned all the men
of Israel and said to the chiefs of the men of war who had gone with him,
“Come near; put your feet on the necks of these kings.” Then they came
near and put their feet on their necks. 25And Joshua said to them, h “Do not
be afraid or dismayed; be strong and courageous. i For thus the LORD will
do to all your enemies against whom you fight.” 26[†]And afterward Joshua
struck them and put them to death, and he hanged them on five trees. And
j they hung on the trees until evening. 27[†]But at the time of the going
down of the sun, Joshua commanded, and k they took them down from the
trees and threw them into the cave where they had hidden themselves, and
they set large stones against the mouth of the cave, which remain to this
very day.
28[†]As for l Makkedah, Joshua captured it on that day and struck it, and
its king, with the edge of the sword. He devoted to destruction every person
in it; he left none remaining. And he did to the king of Makkedah m just as
he had done to the king of Jericho.
Conquest of Southern Canaan
29Then Joshua and all Israel with him passed on from Makkedah to
n Libnah and fought against Libnah. 30And the LORD gave it also and its
king into the hand of Israel. And he struck it with the edge of the sword, and
every person in it; he left none remaining in it. And he did to its king m as
he had done to the king of Jericho.
31Then Joshua and all Israel with him passed on from Libnah to
o Lachish and laid siege to it and fought against it. 32And the LORD gave
Lachish into the hand of Israel, and he captured it on the second day and
struck it with the edge of the sword, and every person in it, as he had done
to Libnah.
33Then Horam king of p Gezer came up to help Lachish. And Joshua
struck him and his people, until he left none remaining.
34Then Joshua and all Israel with him passed on from Lachish to q Eglon.
And they laid siege to it and fought against it. 35And they captured it on that
day, and struck it with the edge of the sword. And he devoted every person
in it to destruction that day, as he had done to Lachish.
36Then Joshua and all Israel with him went up from Eglon to r Hebron.
And they fought against it 37and captured it and struck it with the edge of
the sword, and its king and its towns, and every person in it. He left none
remaining, as he had done to Eglon, and devoted it to destruction and every
person in it.
38Then Joshua and all Israel with him turned back to s Debir and fought
against it 39and he captured it with its king and all its towns. And they
struck them with the edge of the sword and devoted to destruction every
person in it; he left none remaining. Just as he had done to Hebron and to
Libnah and its king, so he did to Debir and to its king.
40[†]So Joshua struck the whole land, the hill country and the Negeb and
the lowland t and the slopes, and all their kings. He left none remaining,
u but devoted to destruction all that breathed, just as the LORD God of Israel
commanded. 41And Joshua struck them from v Kadesh-barnea as far as
Gaza, and all the country of w Goshen, as far as Gibeon. 42And Joshua
captured all these kings and their land at one time, x because the LORD God
of Israel fought for Israel. 43[†] y Then Joshua returned, and all Israel with
him, to the camp at Gilgal.
Conquests in Northern Canaan