JOSHUA 16 [†]The allotment of the people of Joseph went from the Jordan
by Jericho, east of the waters of Jericho, i into the wilderness, going up
from Jericho into the hill country to Bethel. 2Then j going from Bethel to
Luz, it passes along to Ataroth, the territory of the Archites. 3Then it goes
down westward to the territory of the Japhletites, as far as the territory of
Lower k Beth-horon, then to l Gezer, and it ends at the sea.
4 m The people of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, received their
inheritance.
5The territory of the people of Ephraim by their clans was as follows: the
boundary of their inheritance on the east was n Ataroth-addar as far as
Upper Beth-horon, 6and the boundary goes from there to the sea. On the
north is o Michmethath. Then on the east the boundary turns around toward
Taanath-shiloh and passes along beyond it on the east to Janoah, 7then it
goes down from Janoah to Ataroth and p to Naarah, and touches Jericho,
ending at the Jordan. 8From q Tappuah the boundary goes westward to the
brook Kanah and ends at the sea. Such is the inheritance of the tribe of the
people of Ephraim by their clans, 9together with q the towns that were set
apart for the people of Ephraim within the inheritance of the Manassites, all
those towns with their villages. 10[†]However, r they did not drive out the
Canaanites who lived in Gezer, so the Canaanites have lived in the midst of
Ephraim to this day but have been made s to do forced labor.
JOSHUA 17 Then allotment was made to the people of Manasseh, for he
was t the firstborn of Joseph. To u Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the
father of Gilead, v were allotted Gilead and Bashan, because he was a man
of war.
2And allotments were made w to the rest of the people of Manasseh
by their clans, Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Hepher, and Shemida.
These were the male descendants of Manasseh the son of Joseph, by their
clans.
3[†]Now x Zelophehad the son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir,
son of Manasseh, had no sons, but only daughters, and these are the names
of his daughters: x Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 4They
approached y Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun and the leaders
and said, z “The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance along
with our brothers.” So according to the mouth of the LORD he gave them an
inheritance among the brothers of their father.
5Thus there fell to Manasseh
ten portions, besides a the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is on the other
side of the Jordan, 6because the daughters of Manasseh received an
inheritance along with his sons. The land of Gilead was allotted to the rest
of the people of Manasseh.
7The territory of Manasseh reached from Asher to b Michmethath, which
is east of Shechem. Then the boundary goes along southward to the
inhabitants of En-tappuah. 8The land of c Tappuah belonged to Manasseh,
but the town of Tappuah on the boundary of Manasseh belonged to the
people of Ephraim. 9 c Then the boundary went down to the brook Kanah.
These cities, to the south of the brook, among the cities of Manasseh,
belong to Ephraim. Then the boundary of Manasseh goes on the north side
of the brook and ends at the sea, 10the land to the south being Ephraim’s and
that to the north being Manasseh’s, with the sea forming its boundary. On
the north Asher is reached, and on the east Issachar.
11Also in Issachar and
in Asher d Manasseh had Beth-shean and its villages, and Ibleam and its
villages, and the inhabitants of d Dor and its villages, and the inhabitants of
En-dor and its villages, and the inhabitants of d Taanach and its villages,
and the inhabitants of d Megiddo and its villages; e the third is Naphath. [1]
12[†] f Yet the people of Manasseh could not take possession of those cities,
but the Canaanites persisted in dwelling in that land. 13Now when the
people of Israel grew strong, they put the Canaanites g to forced labor, but
did not utterly drive them out.
14Then h the people of Joseph spoke to Joshua, saying, “Why have you
given me but i one lot and one portion as an inheritance, although I am j a
numerous people, since all along the LORD has blessed me?” 15And Joshua
said to them, “If you are a numerous people, go up by yourselves to the
forest, and there clear ground for yourselves in the land of the Perizzites
and k the Rephaim, since l the hill country of Ephraim is too narrow for
you.” 16[†]The people of Joseph said, “The hill country is not enough for
us. Yet all the Canaanites who dwell in the plain have m chariots of iron,
both those in Beth-shean and its villages and those in n the Valley of
Jezreel.” 17Then Joshua said to the house of Joseph, to Ephraim and
Manasseh, “You are a numerous people and have great power. You shall not
have one allotment only,
18but the hill country shall be yours, for though it
is a forest, you shall clear it and possess it to its farthest borders. For you
shall drive out the Canaanites, o though they have chariots of iron, and
though they are strong.”
Allotment of the Remaining Land