JOSHUA 7 [†]But the people of Israel broke faith in regard to the devoted
things, for a Achan the son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the
tribe of Judah, took some of the devoted things. And the anger of the LORD
burned against the people of Israel.
2[†]Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is near b Beth-aven, east
of Bethel, and said to them, “Go up and spy out the land.” And the men
went up and spied out Ai. 3And they returned to Joshua and said to him,
“Do not have all the people go up, but let about two or three thousand men
go up and attack Ai. Do not make the whole people toil up there, for they
are few.” 4So about three thousand men went up there from the people. And
c they fled before the men of Ai, 5and the men of Ai killed about thirty-six
of their men and chased them before the gate as far as Shebarim and struck
them at the descent. And the hearts of the people d melted and became as
water.
6[†]Then Joshua e tore his clothes and f fell to the earth on his face before
the ark of the LORD until the evening, he and the elders of Israel. And they
put g dust on their heads. 7And Joshua said, “Alas, O Lord GOD, h why have
you brought this people over the Jordan at all, to give us into the hands of
the Amorites, to destroy us? Would that we had been content to dwell
beyond the Jordan! 8O Lord, what can I say, when Israel has turned their
backs before their enemies! 9For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of
the land will hear of it and will surround us and i cut off our name from the
earth. And what will you do for your great name?”
The Sin of Achan
10[†]The LORD said to Joshua, “Get up! Why have you fallen on your face?
11Israel has sinned; they have j transgressed my covenant that I commanded
them; they have taken some of the k devoted things; they have stolen and
lied and put them among their own belongings. 12 l Therefore the people of
Israel cannot stand before their enemies. They m turn their backs before
their enemies, because they have become n devoted for destruction. [1] I will
be with you no more, unless you destroy o the devoted things from among
you. 13[†]Get up! Consecrate the people and say, p ‘Consecrate yourselves
for tomorrow; for thus says the LORD, God of Israel, “There are devoted
things in your midst, O Israel. You cannot stand before your enemies until
you take away the devoted things from among you.” 14[†]In the morning
therefore you shall be brought near q by your tribes. And the tribe that the
LORD takes by lot shall come near by clans. And the clan that the LORD
takes shall come near by households. And the household that the LORD
takes shall come near man by man. 15[†] r And he who is taken with the
devoted things shall be burned with fire, he and all that he has, because he
has s transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he has done t an
outrageous thing in Israel.’”
16So Joshua rose early in the morning and brought Israel near tribe by
tribe, and the tribe of Judah was taken. 17And he brought near the clans of
Judah, and the clan of the u Zerahites was taken. And he brought near the
clan of the Zerahites man by man, and Zabdi was taken. 18And he brought
near his household man by man, and Achan the son of Carmi, son of Zabdi,
son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken. 19[†]Then Joshua said to
Achan, “My son, v give glory to the LORD God of Israel and w give praise [2]
to him. And x tell me now what you have done; do not hide it from me.”
20And Achan answered Joshua, “Truly y I have sinned against the LORD
God of Israel, and this is what I did: 21[†]when I saw among the spoil a
beautiful cloak from Shinar, and 200 shekels of silver, and a bar of gold
weighing 50 shekels, [3] then I coveted them and took them. And see, they
are hidden in the earth inside my tent, with the silver underneath.”
22So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent; and behold, it was
hidden in his tent with the silver underneath. 23And they took them out of
the tent and brought them to Joshua and to all the people of Israel. And they
laid them down before the LORD.
24[†]And Joshua and all Israel with him
took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver and the cloak and the bar of
gold, and his sons and daughters and his oxen and donkeys and sheep and
his tent and all that he had. And they brought them up to the z Valley of
Achor.
25And Joshua said, “Why did you a bring trouble on us? The LORD
brings trouble on you today.” And all Israel b stoned him with stones.
c They burned them with fire and stoned them with stones. 26And they
raised over him d a great heap of stones that remains to this day. Then e the
LORD turned from his burning anger. Therefore, to this day the name of that
place is called the Valley of Achor. [4]
The Fall of Ai