JOSHUA 3 [†]Then Joshua rose early in the morning and they set out t from
Shittim. And they came to the Jordan, he and all the people of Israel, and
lodged there before they passed over.
2 u At the end of three days the officers
went through the camp 3[†]and commanded the people, “As soon as you see
the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God being carried by v the
Levitical priests, then you shall set out from your place and follow it.
4[†] w Yet there shall be a distance between you and it, about 2,000 cubits [1]
in length. Do not come near it, in order that you may know the way you
shall go, for you have not passed this way before.” 5[†]Then Joshua said to
the people, x “Consecrate yourselves, for tomorrow the LORD will do
wonders among you.” 6And Joshua said to the priests, y “Take up the ark of
the covenant and pass on before the people.” So they took up the ark of the
covenant and went before the people.
7[†]The LORD said to Joshua, “Today I will begin to z exalt you in the
sight of all Israel, that they may know that, a as I was with Moses, so I will
be with you. 8And as for you, command b the priests who bear the ark of the
covenant, ‘When you come to the brink of the waters of the Jordan, c you
shall stand still in the Jordan.’” 9And Joshua said to the people of Israel,
“Come here and listen to the words of the LORD your God.” 10[†]And
Joshua said, “Here is how you shall know that d the living God is among
you and that he will without fail e drive out from before you the Canaanites,
the Hittites, the Hivites, the Perizzites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, and
the Jebusites. 11Behold, the ark of the covenant of f the Lord of all the
earth [2] g is passing over before you into the Jordan. 12Now therefore h take
twelve men from the tribes of Israel, i from each tribe a man. 13And j when
the soles of the feet of the priests bearing the ark of the LORD, f the Lord of
all the earth, shall rest in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan
shall be cut off from flowing, and the waters coming down from above shall
k stand in one heap.”
14So when the people set out from their tents to pass over the Jordan with
the priests bearing l the ark of the covenant before the people, 15[†]and as
soon as those bearing the ark had come as far as the Jordan, and m the feet
of the priests bearing the ark were dipped in the brink of the water (now
n the Jordan overflows all its banks o throughout the time of harvest),
16[†]the waters coming down from above stood and rose up in a heap very
far away, at Adam, the city that is beside p Zarethan, and those flowing
down toward the Sea of q the Arabah, r the Salt Sea, were completely cut
off. And the people passed over opposite Jericho. 17[†]Now the priests
bearing the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firmly on dry ground in
the midst of the Jordan, s and all Israel was passing over on dry ground until
all the nation finished passing over the Jordan.
Twelve Memorial Stones from the Jordan
JOSHUA 4 When all the nation had finished passing t over the Jordan, the
LORD said to Joshua, 2[†] u “Take twelve men from the people, from each
tribe a man, 3and command them, saying, ‘Take v twelve stones from here
out of the midst of the Jordan, from the very place w where the priests’ feet
stood firmly, and bring them over with you and lay them down in x the
place where you lodge tonight.’” 4Then Joshua called the twelve men from
the people of Israel, whom he had appointed, a man from each tribe. 5And
Joshua said to them, “Pass on before the ark of the LORD your God into the
midst of the Jordan, and take up each of you a stone upon his shoulder,
according to the number of the tribes of the people of Israel, 6that this may
be a sign among you. y When your children ask in time to come, ‘What do
those stones mean to you?’ 7then you shall tell them that z the waters of the
Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the LORD. When it
passed over the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut off. So these
stones shall be to the people of Israel a a memorial forever.”
8And the people of Israel did just as Joshua commanded and took up
twelve stones out of the midst of the Jordan, according to the number of the
tribes of the people of Israel, just as the LORD told Joshua. And they carried
them over with them to the place where they lodged and laid them down [1]
there. 9[†]And Joshua set up [2] twelve stones in the midst of the Jordan, b in
the place where the feet of the priests bearing the ark of the covenant had
stood; and they are there to this day.
10For the priests bearing the ark stood
in the midst of the Jordan until everything was finished that the LORD
commanded Joshua to tell the people, according to all that Moses had
commanded Joshua.
The people passed over in haste. 11And when all the people had finished
passing over, the ark of the LORD and the priests passed over before the
people. 12The sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of
Manasseh c passed over armed before the people of Israel, as Moses had
told them. 13[†]About 40,000 ready for war passed over before the LORD for
battle, to the plains of Jericho. 14[†]On that day the LORD d exalted Joshua
in the sight of all Israel, and they stood in awe of him just as they had stood
in awe of Moses, all the days of his life.
15And the LORD said to Joshua, 16“Command the priests bearing e the ark
of the testimony to come up out of the Jordan.” 17So Joshua commanded the
priests, “Come up out of the Jordan.” 18And when the priests bearing the
ark of the covenant of the LORD came up from the midst of the Jordan, and
the soles of the priests’ feet were lifted up on dry ground, the waters of the
Jordan returned to their place and overflowed all its banks, f as before.
19The people came up out of the Jordan on the tenth day of the first
month, and they encamped at g Gilgal on the east border of Jericho.
20[†]And h those twelve stones, which they took out of the Jordan, Joshua
set up at Gilgal. 21[†]And he said to the people of Israel, i “When your
children ask their fathers in times to come, ‘What do these stones mean?’
22then you shall let your children know, j ‘Israel passed over this Jordan on
dry ground.’ 23For the LORD your God dried up the waters of the Jordan for
you until you passed over, as the LORD your God did to the Red Sea,
k which he dried up for us until we passed over,
24
l so that all the peoples of
the earth may know that the hand of the LORD is m mighty, that you may
n fear the LORD your God forever.” [3]
The New Generation Circumcised