JOSHUA 9 [†]As soon as all the kings who were beyond the Jordan j in the
hill country and in the lowland all along the coast k of the Great Sea toward
Lebanon, l the Hittites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the
Hivites, and the Jebusites, heard of this, 2they gathered together as one to
fight against Joshua and Israel.
3[†]But when the inhabitants of m Gibeon heard what Joshua had done
n to Jericho and o to Ai, 4[†]they on their part acted with cunning and went
and made ready provisions and took worn-out sacks for their donkeys, and
wineskins, worn-out and torn and mended, 5with worn-out, patched sandals
on their feet, and worn-out clothes. And all their provisions were dry and
crumbly.
6[†]And they went to Joshua in p the camp at Gilgal and said to
him and to the men of Israel, “We have come from a distant country, so now
make a covenant with us.” 7[†]But the men of Israel said to q the Hivites,
“Perhaps you live among us; then r how can we make a covenant with
you?” 8They said to Joshua, s “We are your servants.” And Joshua said to
them, “Who are you? And where do you come from?” 9They said to him,
t “From a very distant country your servants have come, because of the
name of the LORD your God. u For we have heard a report of him, and all
that he did in Egypt, 10 v and all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites
who were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon the king of Heshbon, and to Og king
of Bashan, who lived in w Ashtaroth. 11So our elders and all the inhabitants
of our country said to us, ‘Take provisions in your hand for the journey and
go to meet them and say to them, “We are your servants. Come now, make a
covenant with us.”’ 12Here is our bread. It was still warm when we took it
from our houses as our food for the journey on the day we set out to come
to you, but now, behold, it is dry and crumbly.
13These wineskins were new
when we filled them, and behold, they have burst. And these garments and
sandals of ours are worn out from the very long journey.” 14[†]So the men
took some of their provisions, but x did not ask counsel from the LORD.
15And Joshua y made peace with them and made a covenant with them, to
let them live, and the leaders of the congregation swore to them.
16At the end of three days after they had made a covenant with them,
they heard that they were their neighbors z and that they lived among them.
17And the people of Israel set out and reached their cities on the third day.
a Now their cities were Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim.
18[†]But the people of Israel did not attack them, because the leaders of the
congregation had sworn to them by the LORD, the God of Israel. Then all
the congregation murmured against the leaders. 19But all the leaders said to
all the congregation, “We have sworn to them by the LORD, the God of
Israel, and now we may not touch them. 20This we will do to them: let them
live, lest b wrath be upon us, c because of the oath that we swore to them.”
21And the leaders said to them, “Let them live.” So they became d cutters of
wood and drawers of water for all the congregation, just as the leaders e had
said of them.
22Joshua summoned them, and he said to them, “Why did you deceive us,
saying, f ‘We are very far from you,’ when g you dwell among us? 23[†]Now
therefore you are cursed, and some of you shall never be anything but
servants, h cutters of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.”
24They answered Joshua, “Because it was told to your servants for a
certainty that the LORD your God had i commanded his servant Moses to
give you all the land and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from
before you—so j we feared greatly for our lives because of you and did this
thing. 25And now, behold, we are in your hand. Whatever seems good and
right in your sight to do to us, do it.” 26So he did this to them and delivered
them out of the hand of the people of Israel, and they did not kill them.
27[†]But Joshua made them that day k cutters of wood and drawers of water
for the congregation and for the altar of the LORD, to this day, l in the place
that he should choose.
The Sun Stands Still