JOSHUA 15 [†]The allotment for the tribe of the people of Judah according
to their clans reached southward h to the boundary of Edom, to i the
wilderness of Zin at the farthest south. 2And their south boundary ran from
the end of the h Salt Sea, from the bay that faces southward. 3It goes out
southward of j the ascent of Akrabbim, passes along to Zin, and goes up
south of Kadesh-barnea, along by Hezron, up to Addar, turns about to
Karka, 4passes along to Azmon, goes out by k the Brook of Egypt, and
comes to its end at the sea. This shall be your south boundary.
5And the east
boundary is the h Salt Sea, to the mouth of the Jordan. And the boundary on
the north side runs from the bay of the sea at the mouth of the Jordan. 6And
the boundary goes up to l Beth-hoglah and passes along north of m Beth-
arabah. And the boundary goes up to n the stone of Bohan the son of
Reuben. 7And the boundary goes up to Debir from o the Valley of Achor,
and so northward, turning toward Gilgal, which is opposite p the ascent of
Adummim, which is on the south side of the valley. And the boundary
passes along to the waters of p En-shemesh and ends at q En-rogel.
8[†]Then the boundary goes up by r the Valley of the Son of Hinnom at the
southern shoulder of the Jebusite ( s that is, Jerusalem). And the boundary
goes up to the top of the mountain that lies over against the Valley of
Hinnom, on the west, at the northern end of the Valley t of Rephaim. 9Then
the boundary extends from the top of the mountain u to the spring of the
waters of Nephtoah, and from there to the cities of Mount Ephron. Then the
boundary bends around to Baalah ( v that is, Kiriath-jearim). 10And the
boundary circles west of Baalah to Mount Seir, passes along to the northern
shoulder of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon), and goes down to w Beth-
shemesh and passes along by x Timnah. 11The boundary goes out y to the
shoulder of the hill north of Ekron, then the boundary bends around to
Shikkeron and passes along to Mount z Baalah and goes out to Jabneel.
Then the boundary comes to an end at the sea. 12And the west boundary
was a the Great Sea with its coastline. This is the boundary around the
people of Judah according to their clans.
13[†]According to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua, he gave to
Caleb the son of Jephunneh a portion among the people of Judah, b Kiriath-
arba, that is, b Hebron (Arba was the father of Anak). 14And Caleb drove
out from there the three sons of Anak, c Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai,
the descendants of Anak. 15And he went up from there against the
inhabitants of Debir. d Now the name of Debir formerly was Kiriath-sepher.
16And Caleb said, “Whoever strikes Kiriath-sepher and captures it, to him
will I give Achsah my daughter as wife.” 17
e And Othniel the son of Kenaz,
f the brother of Caleb, captured it. And he gave him Achsah his daughter as
wife. 18When she came to him, she urged him to ask her father for a field.
And she got off her donkey, and Caleb said to her, “What do you want?”
19She said to him, “Give me a blessing. Since you have given me the land
of the Negeb, give me also springs of water.” And he gave her the upper
springs and the lower springs.
20This is the inheritance of the tribe of the people of Judah according to
their clans. 21The cities belonging to the tribe of the people of Judah in the
extreme south, toward the boundary of Edom, were Kabzeel, g Eder, Jagur,
22Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah, 23Kedesh, Hazor, Ithnan, 24 h Ziph, Telem,
Bealoth, 25Hazor-hadattah, Kerioth-hezron (that is, Hazor), 26Amam,
Shema, Moladah, 27Hazar-gaddah, Heshmon, Beth-pelet, 28Hazar-shual,
i Beersheba, Biziothiah, 29Baalah, Iim, Ezem, 30Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah,
31
j Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah, 32Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain, and Rimmon:
in all, twenty-nine cities with their villages.
33And in the lowland, k Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah, 34Zanoah, En-gannim,
Tappuah, Enam, 35
l Jarmuth, m Adullam, n Socoh, n Azekah, 36Shaaraim,
Adithaim, Gederah, Gederothaim: fourteen cities with their villages.
37Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal-gad, 38Dilean, Mizpeh, Joktheel, 39 o Lachish,
Bozkath, p Eglon, 40Cabbon, Lahmam, Chitlish, 41Gederoth, Beth-dagon,
Naamah, and q Makkedah: sixteen cities with their villages.
42 r Libnah, Ether, Ashan, 43Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib, 44 s Keilah, Achzib,
and Mareshah: nine cities with their villages.
45 t Ekron, with its towns and its villages; 46from Ekron to the sea, all that
were by the side of Ashdod, with their villages.
47
t Ashdod, its towns and its villages; t Gaza, its towns and its villages; to
u the Brook of Egypt, and v the Great Sea with its coastline.
48And in the hill country, Shamir, Jattir, Socoh, 49Dannah, Kiriath-sannah
( w that is, Debir), 50Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim, 51
x Goshen, Holon, and
y Giloh: eleven cities with their villages.
52Arab, Dumah, Eshan, 53Janim, Beth-tappuah, Aphekah, 54Humtah,
z Kiriath-arba (that is, z Hebron), and Zior: nine cities with their villages.
55 a Maon, a Carmel, b Ziph, Juttah, 56Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah, 57Kain,
Gibeah, and c Timnah: ten cities with their villages.
58Halhul, Beth-zur, Gedor,
59Maarath, Beth-anoth, and Eltekon: six cities
with their villages.
60 d Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim), and Rabbah: two cities with
their villages.
61In the wilderness, e Beth-arabah, Middin, Secacah, 62Nibshan, the City
of Salt, and f Engedi: six cities with their villages.
63[†]But the g Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, h the people of
Judah could not drive out, h so the Jebusites dwell with the people of Judah
at Jerusalem to this day.
The Allotment for Ephraim and Manasseh