JOSHUA 23 [†]A long time afterward, when the LORD had given e rest to
Israel from all their surrounding enemies, and Joshua f was old and well
advanced in years, 2Joshua g summoned all Israel, its elders and heads, its
judges and officers, and said to them, “I am now old and well advanced in
years. 3And you have seen all that the LORD your God has done to all these
nations for your sake, h for it is the LORD your God who has fought for you.
4[†]Behold, i I have allotted to you as an inheritance for your tribes those
nations that remain, along with all the nations that I have already cut off,
from the Jordan to the Great Sea in the west. 5The LORD your God j will
push them back before you and drive them out of your sight. And you shall
possess their land, k just as the LORD your God promised you. 6Therefore,
l be very strong to keep and to do all that is written in the Book of the Law
of Moses, m turning aside from it neither to the right hand nor to the left,
7[†] n that you may not mix with these nations remaining among you o or
make mention of the names of their gods p or swear by them or serve them
or bow down to them, 8 q but you shall cling to the LORD your God just as
you have done to this day.
9 r For the LORD has driven out before you great
and strong nations. And as for you, s no man has been able to stand before
you to this day.
10 t One man of you puts to flight a thousand, since it is the
LORD your God u who fights for you, just as he promised you. 11 v Be very
careful, therefore, to love the LORD your God. 12For if you turn back and
cling to the remnant of these nations remaining among you w and make
marriages with them, so that you associate with them and they with you,
13know for certain that x the LORD your God will no longer drive out these
nations before you, y but they shall be a snare and a trap for you, a whip on
your sides and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from off this good
ground that the LORD your God has given you.
14“And now z I am about to go the way of all the earth, and you know in
your hearts and souls, all of you, that a not one word has failed of all the
good things [1] that the LORD your God promised concerning you. All have
come to pass for you; not one of them has failed. 15[†]But just as all the
good things that the LORD your God promised concerning you have been
fulfilled for you, so the LORD will bring upon you b all the evil things, until
he has destroyed you from off this good land that the LORD your God has
given you, 16if you transgress the covenant of the LORD your God, which he
commanded you, and go and serve other gods and bow down to them. Then
the anger of the LORD will be kindled against you, and you shall perish
quickly from off the good land that he has given to you.”
The Covenant Renewal at Shechem