JUDGES 2 [†]Now the angel of the LORD went up from Gilgal to j Bochim.
And he said, “I brought you up from Egypt and brought you into the land
that I swore to give to your fathers. I said, k ‘I will never break my covenant
with you, 2[†] l and you shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this
land; m you shall break down their altars.’ But you have not obeyed my
voice. What is this you have done? 3So now I say, n I will not drive them
out before you, but they shall become o thorns in your sides, and their gods
shall be a snare to you.” 4As soon as the angel of the LORD spoke these
words to all the people of Israel, the people lifted up their voices and wept.
5[†]And they called the name of that place Bochim. [1] And they sacrificed
there to the LORD.
The Death of Joshua
6[†]When Joshua dismissed the people, the people of Israel went each to his
inheritance to take possession of the land. 7 p And the people served the
LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders who outlived
Joshua, who had seen all the great work that the LORD had done for Israel.
8And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died at the age of 110
years. 9And they buried him within the boundaries of q his inheritance in
Timnath-heres, r in the hill country of Ephraim, north of the mountain of
Gaash. 10And all that generation also were gathered to their fathers. And
there arose another generation after them who did not know the LORD or the
work that he had done for Israel.
Israel’s Unfaithfulness
11[†] s And the people of Israel did what was evil in the sight of the LORD
and served the Baals. 12 t And they abandoned the LORD, the God of their
fathers, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt. u They went after
other gods, from among the gods of the peoples who were around them, and
v bowed down to them. w And they provoked the LORD to anger.
13[†]They
abandoned the LORD x and served the Baals and the Ashtaroth. 14 y So the
anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he z gave them over to
plunderers, who plundered them. a And he sold them into the hand of their
surrounding enemies, b so that they could no longer withstand their
enemies. 15[†]Whenever they marched out, the hand of the LORD was
against them for harm, as the LORD had warned, c and as the LORD had
sworn to them. And they were in terrible distress.
The LORD Raises Up Judges
16[†] d Then the LORD raised up judges, e who saved them out of the hand of
those who plundered them. 17[†]Yet they did not listen to their judges, for
f they whored after other gods and bowed down to them. g They soon turned
aside from the way in which their fathers had walked, who had obeyed the
commandments of the LORD, and they did not do so. 18[†]Whenever the
LORD raised up judges for them, h the LORD was with the judge, and he
saved them from the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge. i For
the LORD was moved to pity by j their groaning because of those who
afflicted and oppressed them. 19But k whenever the judge died, they turned
back and were more corrupt than their fathers, going after other gods,
serving them and bowing down to them. They did not drop any of their
practices or their stubborn ways. 20[†] l So the anger of the LORD was
kindled against Israel, and he said, “Because this people m have
transgressed my covenant that I commanded their fathers and have not
obeyed my voice, 21
n I will no longer drive out before them any of the
nations that Joshua left when he died, 22in order o to test Israel by them,
whether they will take care to walk in the way of the LORD as their fathers
did, or not.” 23So the LORD left those nations, not driving them out quickly,
and he did not give them into the hand of Joshua.