JUDGES 4 [†] x And the people of Israel again did what was evil in the sight
of the LORD after Ehud died. 2And the LORD y sold them into the hand of
z Jabin king of Canaan, who reigned in z Hazor. The commander of his
army was a Sisera, who lived in b Harosheth-hagoyim. 3Then the people of
Israel c cried out to the LORD for help, for he had d 900 chariots of iron and
he oppressed the people of Israel cruelly for twenty years.
4[†]Now Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, was judging
Israel at that time. 5She used to sit under the palm of Deborah between
Ramah and Bethel in e the hill country of Ephraim, and the people of Israel
came up to her for judgment. 6[†]She sent and summoned f Barak the son of
Abinoam from g Kedesh-naphtali and said to him, “Has not the LORD, the
God of Israel, commanded you, ‘Go, gather your men at Mount h Tabor,
taking 10,000 from the people of Naphtali and the people of Zebulun. 7And
I will draw out Sisera, the general of Jabin’s army, to meet you by i the river
Kishon with his chariots and his troops, j and I will give him into your
hand’?” 8Barak said to her, “If you will go with me, I will go, but if you
will not go with me, I will not go.” 9And she said, “I will surely go with
you. Nevertheless, the road on which you are going will not lead to your
glory, for the LORD will k sell Sisera into the hand of a woman.” Then
Deborah arose and went with Barak to Kedesh. 10And Barak called out
l Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh. And 10,000 men went up at his heels,
and Deborah went up with him.
11[†]Now Heber m the Kenite had separated from the Kenites, the
descendants of n Hobab the father-in-law of Moses, and had pitched his tent
as far away as the oak in o Zaanannim, which is near Kedesh.
12When Sisera was told that Barak the son of Abinoam had gone up to
Mount Tabor,
13[†]Sisera called out all his chariots, p 900 chariots of iron,
and all the men who were with him, from Harosheth-hagoyim to the river
Kishon. 14And Deborah said to Barak, “Up! For this is the day in which
q the LORD has given Sisera into your hand. r Does not the LORD go out
before you?” So Barak went down from Mount Tabor with 10,000 men
following him. 15 s And the LORD routed Sisera and all his chariots and all
his army before Barak by the edge of the sword. And Sisera got down from
his chariot and fled away on foot. 16And Barak pursued the chariots and the
army to Harosheth-hagoyim, and all the army of Sisera fell by the edge of
the sword; not a man was left.
17[†]But Sisera fled away on foot to the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the
Kenite, for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house
of Heber the Kenite. 18And Jael came out to meet Sisera and said to him,
“Turn aside, my lord; turn aside to me; do not be afraid.” So he turned aside
to her into the tent, and she covered him with a rug. 19And he said to her,
“Please give me a little water to drink, for I am thirsty.” So she opened t a
skin of milk and gave him a drink and covered him. 20And he said to her,
“Stand at the opening of the tent, and if any man comes and asks you, ‘Is
anyone here?’ say, ‘No.’” 21But Jael the wife of Heber took a tent peg, and
took a hammer in her hand. Then she went softly to him and drove the peg
into his temple until it went down into the ground while he was lying fast
asleep from weariness. So he died. 22And behold, as Barak was pursuing
Sisera, Jael went out to meet him and said to him, “Come, and I will show
you the man whom you are seeking.” So he went in to her tent, and there
lay Sisera dead, with the tent peg in his temple.
23 u So on that day God subdued Jabin the king of Canaan before the
people of Israel. 24And the hand of the people of Israel pressed harder and
harder against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they destroyed Jabin king of
Canaan.
The Song of Deborah and Barak