JUDGES 1 [†]After the death of Joshua, the people of Israel a inquired of the
LORD, b “Who shall go up first for us against the Canaanites, to fight against
them?” 2[†]The LORD said, “Judah shall go up; behold, I have given the
land into his hand.” 3And Judah said to Simeon his brother, “Come up with
me into the territory allotted to me, that we may fight against the
Canaanites. c And I likewise will go with you into the territory allotted to
you.” So Simeon went with him. 4Then Judah went up and the LORD gave
the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand, and they defeated 10,000
of them at Bezek. 5[†]They found Adoni-bezek at Bezek and fought against
him and defeated the Canaanites and the Perizzites. 6Adoni-bezek fled, but
they pursued him and caught him and cut off his thumbs and his big toes.
7And Adoni-bezek said, “Seventy kings with their thumbs and their big toes
cut off d used to pick up scraps under my table. e As I have done, so God
has repaid me.” And they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there.
8[†] f And the men of Judah fought against Jerusalem and captured it and
struck it with the edge of the sword and set the city on fire. 9And afterward
the men of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites who lived in
g the hill country, in the Negeb, and in g the lowland. 10[†] h And Judah went
against the Canaanites who lived in Hebron i (now the name of Hebron was
formerly Kiriath-arba), and they defeated j Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai.
11From there they went against the inhabitants of Debir. The name of
Debir was formerly Kiriath-sepher.
12And Caleb said, “He who attacks
Kiriath-sepher and captures it, I will give him Achsah my daughter for a
wife.” 13And Othniel the son of Kenaz, k Caleb’s younger brother, captured
it. And he gave him Achsah his daughter for a wife. 14When she came to
him, she urged him to ask her father for a field. And she dismounted from
her donkey, and Caleb said to her, “What do you want?” 15She said to him,
“Give me a blessing. Since you have set me in the land of the Negeb, give
me also springs of water.” And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the
lower springs.
16[†]And the descendants of the l Kenite, Moses’ father-in-law, went up
with the people of Judah m from the city of palms into the wilderness of
Judah, which lies in the Negeb near n Arad, o and they went and settled with
the people. 17
p And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they defeated
the Canaanites who inhabited Zephath and devoted it to destruction. So the
name of the city was called q Hormah. [1] 18[†]Judah also r captured Gaza
with its territory, and Ashkelon with its territory, and Ekron with its
territory.
19[†] p And the LORD was with Judah, and he took possession of
the s hill country, but he could not drive out the inhabitants of the plain
because they had t chariots of iron. 20 u And Hebron was given to Caleb, as
Moses had said. And he drove out from it v the three sons of Anak. 21But
the people of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites who lived in
Jerusalem, w so the Jebusites have lived with the people of Benjamin in
Jerusalem to this day.
22[†]The house of Joseph also went up against Bethel, x and the LORD
was with them. 23And the house of Joseph scouted out Bethel. ( y Now the
name of the city was formerly Luz.) 24And the spies saw a man coming out
of the city, and they said to him, “Please show us the way into the city, z and
we will deal kindly with you.” 25And he showed them the way into the city.
And they struck the city with the edge of the sword, but they let the man
and all his family go. 26And the man went to a the land of the Hittites and
built a city and called its name Luz. That is its name to this day.
Failure to Complete the Conquest
27 b Manasseh did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shean and its
villages, or Taanach and its villages, or the inhabitants of Dor and its
villages, or the inhabitants of Ibleam and its villages, or the inhabitants of
Megiddo and its villages, for the Canaanites persisted in dwelling in that
land. 28When Israel grew strong, they put the Canaanites to forced labor,
but did not drive them out completely.
29 c And Ephraim did not drive out the Canaanites who lived in Gezer, so
the Canaanites lived in Gezer among them.
30Zebulun did not drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, or the inhabitants
of d Nahalol, so the Canaanites lived among them, but became subject to
forced labor.
31 e Asher did not drive out the inhabitants of Acco, or the inhabitants of
Sidon or of Ahlab or of Achzib or of Helbah or of Aphik or of Rehob, 32so
the Asherites lived among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land, for
they did not drive them out.
33Naphtali did not drive out the inhabitants of f Beth-shemesh, or the
inhabitants of Beth-anath, so they lived among the Canaanites, the
inhabitants of the land. Nevertheless, the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and
of Beth-anath became subject to forced labor for them.
34[†] g The Amorites pressed the people of Dan back into the hill country,
for they did not allow them to come down to the plain. 35The Amorites
persisted in dwelling in Mount Heres, h in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim, but the
hand of the house of Joseph rested heavily on them, and they became
subject to forced labor.
36And the border of the Amorites ran from i the
ascent of Akrabbim, from Sela and upward.
Israel’s Disobedience