JUDGES 14 [†] r Samson went down to s Timnah, and at Timnah he saw one
of the daughters of the Philistines. 2[†]Then he came up and told his father
and mother, “I saw one of the daughters of the Philistines at Timnah. t Now
get her for me as my wife.” 3But his father and mother said to him, “Is there
not a woman among the daughters u of your relatives, or among all our
people, that you must go to take a wife from the v uncircumcised
Philistines?” But Samson said to his father, “Get her for me, for she is right
in my eyes.”
4[†]His father and mother did not know that it was w from the LORD, for
he was seeking an opportunity against the Philistines. x At that time the
Philistines ruled over Israel.
5Then Samson went down with his father and mother to Timnah, and
they came to the vineyards of Timnah. And behold, a young lion came
toward him roaring. 6[†] y Then the Spirit of the LORD rushed upon him, and
although he had nothing in his hand, he tore the lion in pieces as one tears a
young goat. But he did not tell his father or his mother what he had done.
7Then he went down and talked with the woman, and she was right in
Samson’s eyes.
8[†]After some days he returned to take her. And he turned aside to see
the carcass of the lion, and behold, there was a swarm of bees in the body of
the lion, and honey.
9He scraped it out into his hands and went on, eating as
he went. And he came to his father and mother and gave some to them, and
they ate. But he did not tell them that he had scraped the honey from the
carcass of the lion.
10[†]His father went down to the woman, and Samson prepared a feast
there, for so the young men used to do. 11As soon as the people saw him,
they brought thirty companions to be with him. 12And Samson said to them,
z “Let me now put a riddle to you. If you can tell me what it is, within a the
seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty linen
garments and thirty b changes of clothes, 13but if you cannot tell me what it
is, then you shall give me thirty linen garments and thirty changes of
clothes.” And they said to him, “Put your riddle, that we may hear it.”
14And he said to them,
“Out of the eater came something to eat.
Out of the strong came something sweet.”
And in three days they could not solve the riddle.
15[†]On the fourth [1] day they said to Samson’s wife, c “Entice your
husband to tell us what the riddle is, d lest we burn you and your father’s
house with fire. Have you invited us here to impoverish us?” 16And
Samson’s wife wept over him and said, e “You only hate me; you do not
love me. You have put a riddle to my people, and you have not told me what
it is.” And he said to her, “Behold, I have not told my father nor my mother,
and shall I tell you?” 17She wept before him the seven days that their feast
lasted, and on the seventh day he told her, because f she pressed him hard.
Then she told the riddle to her people. 18[†]And the men of the city said to
him on the seventh day before the sun went down,
“What is sweeter than honey?
What is stronger than a lion?”
And he said to them,
“If you had not plowed with my heifer,
you would not have found out my riddle.”
19
g And the Spirit of the LORD rushed upon him, and he went down to
h Ashkelon and struck down thirty men of the town and took their spoil and
gave the garments to those who had told the riddle. In hot anger he went
back to his father’s house. 20And Samson’s wife was given to i his
companion, j who had been his best man.
Samson Defeats the Philistines
JUDGES 15 After some days, at the time of wheat harvest, Samson went to
visit his wife with k a young goat. And he said, “I will go in to my wife in
the chamber.” But her father would not allow him to go in. 2And her father
said, “I really thought that you utterly hated her, l so I gave her to your
companion. Is not her younger sister more beautiful than she? Please take
her instead.” 3And Samson said to them, “This time I shall be innocent in
regard to the Philistines, when I do them harm.” 4[†]So Samson went and
caught 300 foxes and took torches. And he turned them tail to tail and put a
torch between each pair of tails. 5And when he had set fire to the torches, he
let the foxes go into the standing grain of the Philistines and set fire to the
stacked grain and the standing grain, as well as the olive orchards. 6Then
the Philistines said, “Who has done this?” And they said, “Samson, the son-
in-law of the Timnite, because he has taken his wife m and given her to his
companion.” And the Philistines came up and n burned her and her father
with fire. 7And Samson said to them, “If this is what you do, I swear I will
be avenged on you, and after that I will quit.” 8[†]And he struck them hip
and thigh with a great blow, and he went down and stayed in the o cleft of
the rock of Etam.
9Then the Philistines came up and encamped in Judah and p made a raid
on q Lehi. 10And the men of Judah said, “Why have you come up against
us?” They said, “We have come up to bind Samson, to do to him as he did
to us.” 11Then 3,000 men of Judah went down to the cleft of the rock of
Etam, and said to Samson, “Do you not know that r the Philistines are rulers
over us? What then is this that you have done to us?” And he said to them,
“As they did to me, so have I done to them.” 12And they said to him, “We
have come down to bind you, that we may give you into the hands of the
Philistines.” And Samson said to them, “Swear to me that you will not
attack me yourselves.” 13They said to him, “No; we will only bind you and
give you into their hands. We will surely not kill you.” So they bound him
with two s new ropes and brought him up from the rock.
14[†]When he came to Lehi, the Philistines came shouting to meet him.
t Then the Spirit of the LORD rushed upon him, and the ropes that were on
his arms became as flax that has caught fire, and his bonds melted off his
hands. 15And he found a fresh jawbone of a donkey, and put out his hand
and took it, u and with it he struck 1,000 men. 16And Samson said,
“With the jawbone of a donkey,
heaps upon heaps,
with the jawbone of a donkey
have I struck down a thousand men.”
17As soon as he had finished speaking, he threw away the jawbone out of
his hand. And that place v was called Ramath-lehi. [1]
18[†]And he was very thirsty, and he called upon the LORD and said,
w “You have granted this great salvation by the hand of your servant, and
shall I now die of thirst and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised?”
19And God split open the hollow place that is v at Lehi, and water came out
from it. And when he drank, x his spirit returned, and he revived. Therefore
the name of it was called En-hakkore; [2] it is at Lehi to this day.
20And he
judged Israel y in the days of the Philistines twenty years.
Samson and Delilah