JUDGES 8 [†] z Then the men of Ephraim said to him, “What is this that you
have done to us, not to call us when you went to fight against Midian?” And
they accused him fiercely.
2And he said to them, “What have I done now in
comparison with you? Is not a the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better
than the grape harvest of Abiezer? 3 b God has given into your hands the
princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb. What have I been able to do in
comparison with you?” c Then their anger [1] against him subsided when he
said this.
4And Gideon came to the Jordan and crossed over, he and d the 300 men
who were with him, exhausted yet pursuing. 5So he said to the men of
e Succoth, “Please give loaves of bread to the people who follow me, for
they are exhausted, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings
of Midian.” 6And the officials of Succoth said, f “Are the hands of Zebah
and Zalmunna already in your hand, g that we should give bread to your
army?” 7So Gideon said, “Well then, when the LORD has given Zebah and
Zalmunna into my hand, h I will flail your flesh with the thorns of the
wilderness and with briers.” 8And from there he went up to i Penuel, and
spoke to them in the same way, and the men of Penuel answered him as the
men of Succoth had answered. 9And he said to the men of Penuel, j “When
I come again in peace, k I will break down this tower.”
10Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with their army, about
15,000 men, all who were left of all the army of l the people of the East, for
there had fallen 120,000 men m who drew the sword. 11And Gideon went up
by the way of the tent dwellers east of n Nobah and Jogbehah and attacked
the army, for the army felt o secure. 12And Zebah and Zalmunna fled, and
he pursued them p and captured the two kings of Midian, Zebah and
Zalmunna, and he threw all the army into a panic.
13Then Gideon the son of Joash returned from the battle by the ascent of
Heres. 14And he captured a young man of Succoth and questioned him. And
he wrote down for him the officials and elders of Succoth, seventy-seven
men. 15And he came to the men of Succoth and said, “Behold Zebah and
Zalmunna, about whom you taunted me, saying, q ‘Are the hands of Zebah
and Zalmunna already in your hand, that we should give bread to your men
who are exhausted?’” 16[†]And he took the elders of the city, and he took
thorns of the wilderness and briers and with them taught the men of Succoth
a lesson. 17 r And he broke down the tower of Penuel and killed the men of
the city.
18Then he said to Zebah and Zalmunna, “Where are the men whom you
killed at s Tabor?” They answered, “As you are, so were they. Every one of
them resembled the son of a king.” 19And he said, “They were my brothers,
the sons of my mother. t As the LORD lives, if you had saved them alive, I
would not kill you.” 20So he said to Jether his firstborn, “Rise and kill
them!” But the young man did not draw his sword, for he was afraid,
because he was still a young man. 21Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, “Rise
yourself and fall upon us, for as the man is, so is his strength.” And Gideon
arose and u killed Zebah and Zalmunna, and he took v the crescent
ornaments that were on the necks of their camels.
Gideon’s Ephod
22[†]Then the men of Israel said to Gideon, “Rule over us, you and your son
and your grandson also, for you have saved us from the hand of Midian.”
23Gideon said to them, “I will not rule over you, and my son will not rule
over you; w the LORD will rule over you.” 24And Gideon said to them, “Let
me make a request of you: every one of you give me the earrings from his
spoil.” (For they had golden earrings, x because they were Ishmaelites.)
25And they answered, “We will willingly give them.” And they spread a
cloak, and every man threw in it the earrings of his spoil. 26And the weight
of the golden earrings that he requested was 1,700 shekels [2] of gold,
besides y the crescent ornaments and z the pendants and the purple garments
worn by the kings of Midian, and besides the collars that were around the
necks of their camels. 27[†]And Gideon a made an ephod of it and put it in
his city, b in Ophrah. And all Israel c whored after it there, and it became a
d snare to Gideon and to his family.
28So Midian was subdued before the
people of Israel, and they raised their heads no more. e And the land had
rest forty years in the days of Gideon.
The Death of Gideon
29[†] f Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and lived in his own house. 30Now
Gideon had g seventy sons, his own offspring, [3] for he had many wives.
31And his concubine h who was in Shechem also bore him a son, and he
called his name Abimelech. 32And Gideon the son of Joash died i in a good
old age and was buried in the tomb of Joash his father, j at Ophrah of the
Abiezrites.
33[†] k As soon as Gideon died, the people of Israel turned again and
l whored after the Baals and made m Baal-berith their god. 34And the people
of Israel n did not remember the LORD their God, who had delivered them
from the hand of all their enemies on every side, 35 o and they did not show
steadfast love to the family of Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) in return for all
the good that he had done to Israel.
Abimelech’s Conspiracy