LEVITICUS 6 [†] [1] The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“If anyone sins
and b commits a breach of faith against the LORD by c deceiving his
neighbor in d a matter of deposit or security, or through robbery, or e if he
has oppressed his neighbor 3or f has found something lost and lied about it,
g swearing falsely—in any of all the things that people do and sin thereby—
4if he has sinned and has realized his guilt and will restore e what he took
by robbery or what he got by oppression or the deposit that was committed
to him or the lost thing that he found 5or anything about which he has sworn
falsely, he shall h restore it in full and shall add a fifth to it, and give it to
him to whom it belongs on the day he realizes his guilt. 6And he shall bring
to the priest as his compensation to the LORD i a ram without blemish out of
the flock, or its equivalent for a guilt offering. 7 j And the priest shall make
atonement for him before the LORD, and he shall be forgiven for any of the
things that one may do and thereby become guilty.”
The Priests and the Offerings
8[†] [2] The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 9“Command Aaron and his sons,
saying, This is the law of the burnt offering. The burnt offering shall be on
the hearth on the altar all night until the morning, and the fire of the altar
shall be kept burning on it. 10And k the priest shall put on his linen garment
and put his linen undergarment on his body, and he shall take up the ashes
to which the fire has reduced the burnt offering on the altar and put them
l beside the altar.
11Then m he shall take off his garments and put on other
garments and carry the ashes n outside the camp to a clean place. 12The fire
on the altar shall be kept burning on it; it shall not go out. The priest shall
burn wood on it every morning, and he shall arrange the burnt offering on it
and shall burn on it o the fat of the peace offerings. 13Fire shall be kept
burning on the altar continually; it shall not go out.
14[†]“And this is the law of p the grain offering. The sons of Aaron shall
offer it before the LORD in front of the altar.
15And one shall take from it a
handful of the fine flour of the grain offering and its oil and all the
frankincense that is on the grain offering and burn this as its q memorial
portion on the altar, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
16And r the rest of it
Aaron and his sons shall eat. It shall be eaten unleavened s in a holy place.
In the court of the tent of meeting they shall eat it. 17 t It shall not be baked
with leaven. u I have given it as their portion of my food offerings. v It is a
thing most holy, like the sin offering and the guilt offering. 18Every male
among the children of Aaron may eat of it, as decreed forever throughout
your generations, from the LORD’s food offerings. Whatever touches them
shall become holy.”
19[†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 20 w “This is the offering that
Aaron and his sons shall offer to the LORD on the day when he is anointed: a
x tenth of an ephah [3] of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half of it in
the morning and half in the evening. 21It shall be made with oil y on a
griddle. You shall bring it z well mixed, in baked [4] pieces like a grain
offering, and offer it for a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
22The priest from
among Aaron’s sons, who is anointed to succeed him, shall offer it to the
LORD as decreed forever. a The whole of it shall be burned. 23Every grain
offering of a priest shall be wholly burned. It shall not be eaten.”
24[†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 25“Speak to Aaron and his sons,
saying, b This is the law of the sin offering. c In the place where the burnt
offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed before the LORD; d it is most
holy.
26 e The priest who offers it for sin shall eat it. f In a holy place it shall
be eaten, in the court of the tent of meeting. 27Whatever touches its flesh
shall be holy, and when any of its blood is splashed on a garment, you shall
wash that on which it was splashed in a holy place. 28And g the earthenware
vessel in which it is boiled h shall be broken. But if it is boiled in a bronze
vessel, that shall be scoured and rinsed in water.
29Every male among the
priests may eat of it; d it is most holy.
30 i But no sin offering shall be eaten
from which any blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make
atonement in the Holy Place; it shall be burned up with fire.