LEVITICUS 26 [†]“You shall not make s idols for yourselves or erect an
t image or u pillar, and you shall not set up a v figured stone in your land to
bow down to it, for I am the LORD your God. 2 w You shall keep my
Sabbaths and reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD.
3[†] x “If you walk in my statutes and observe my commandments and do
them, 4then y I will give you your rains in their season, and the land shall
yield its increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. 5 z Your
threshing shall last to the time of the grape harvest, and the grape harvest
shall last to the time for sowing. And a you shall eat your bread to the full
and b dwell in your land securely.
6
c I will give peace in the land, and d you
shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid. And e I will remove harmful
beasts from the land, f and the sword shall not go through your land. 7You
shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword.
8
g Five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you shall chase ten
thousand, and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword. 9 h I will turn
to you and i make you fruitful and multiply you and will confirm my
covenant with you. 10You shall eat j old store long kept, and you shall clear
out the old to make way for the new.
11 k I will make my dwelling [1] among
you, and my soul shall not abhor you. 12 l And I m will walk among you and
will be your God, and you shall be my people. 13
n I am the LORD your God,
who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that you should not be their
slaves. o And I have broken the bars of your yoke and made you walk erect.
Punishment for Disobedience
14
p “But if you will not listen to me and will not do all these
commandments, 15if you spurn my statutes, and if your soul abhors my
rules, so that you will not do all my commandments, but q break my
covenant, 16then I will do this to you: I will visit you with panic, with
r wasting disease and fever that consume the eyes and make the heart ache.
And s you shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it. 17I will
t set my face against you, and u you shall be struck down before your
enemies. v Those who hate you shall rule over you, and w you shall flee
when none pursues you. 18[†]And if in spite of this you will not listen to
me, then I will discipline you again x sevenfold for your sins, 19and I will
break y the pride of your power, and I z will make your heavens like iron
and your earth like bronze. 20And a your strength shall be spent in vain, for
b your land shall not yield its increase, and the trees of the land shall not
yield their fruit.
21 c “Then if you walk contrary to me and will not listen to me, I will
continue striking you, sevenfold for your sins. 22And d I will let loose the
wild beasts against you, which shall bereave you of your children and
destroy your livestock and make you few in number, so that e your roads
shall be deserted.
23“And f if by this discipline you are not turned to me c but walk contrary
to me, 24 g then I also will walk contrary to you, and I myself will strike you
sevenfold for your sins. 25And h I will bring a sword upon you, that shall
execute vengeance for the covenant. And if you gather within your cities, i I
will send pestilence among you, and you shall be delivered into the hand of
the enemy.
26 j When I break your supply [2] of bread, ten women shall bake
your bread in a single oven and shall dole out your bread again by weight,
and k you shall eat and not be satisfied.
27[†]“But l if in spite of this you will not listen to me, but walk contrary
to me, 28then I will walk contrary to you m in fury, and I myself will
discipline you x sevenfold for your sins. 29 n You shall eat the flesh of your
sons, and you shall eat the flesh of your daughters. 30And o I will destroy
your high places and cut down your incense altars and p cast your dead
bodies upon the dead bodies of your idols, and my soul will abhor you.
31And I will q lay your cities waste and will r make your sanctuaries
desolate, and s I will not smell your pleasing aromas. 32And t I myself will
devastate the land, so that your enemies who settle in it shall be u appalled
at it. 33And v I will scatter you among the nations, and I will unsheathe the
sword after you, and your land shall be a desolation, and your cities shall be
a waste.
34[†] w “Then the land shall enjoy [3] its Sabbaths as long as it lies
desolate, while you are in your enemies’ land; then the land shall rest, and
enjoy its Sabbaths. 35As long as it lies desolate it shall have rest, the rest
that it did not have on your Sabbaths when you were dwelling in it. 36And
as for those of you who are left, x I will send faintness into their hearts in
the lands of their enemies. The y sound of a z driven leaf shall put them to
flight, and they shall flee as one flees from the sword, and they shall fall
when none pursues. 37They shall stumble over one another, as if to escape a
sword, though none pursues. And a you shall have no power to stand before
your enemies. 38And you shall perish among the nations, and the land of
your enemies shall eat you up. 39And those of you who are left shall b rot
away in your enemies’ lands because of their iniquity, and also because of
the iniquities of their fathers they shall rot away like them.
40[†]“But if c they confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their fathers
in their treachery that they d committed against me, and also in walking
contrary to me, 41so that I walked contrary to them and brought them into
the land of their enemies—if then their e uncircumcised heart is f humbled
and they make amends for their iniquity,
42then I will g remember my
covenant with Jacob, and I will remember my covenant with Isaac and my
covenant with Abraham, and I will h remember the land. 43But w the land
shall be abandoned by them and enjoy its Sabbaths while it lies desolate
without them, and they shall make amends for their iniquity, because they
spurned my rules and their soul abhorred my statutes. 44Yet for all that,
when they are in the land of their enemies, i I will not spurn them, neither
will I abhor them so as to destroy them utterly and j break my covenant
with them, for I am the LORD their God. 45But I will for their sake
remember the covenant with their forefathers, k whom I brought out of the
land of Egypt l in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God: I am
the LORD.”
46
m These are the statutes and rules and laws that the LORD made between
himself and the people of Israel through Moses n on Mount Sinai.
Laws About Vows