LEVITICUS 21 [†]And the LORD said to Moses, “Speak to the priests, the
sons of Aaron, and say to them, a No one shall make himself unclean for the
dead among his people, 2except for his closest relatives, his mother, his
father, his son, his daughter, his brother,
3or his virgin sister (who is near to
him because she has had no husband; for her he may make himself
unclean). 4He shall not make himself unclean as a husband among his
people and so profane himself. 5[†] b They shall not make bald patches on
their heads, nor shave off the edges of their beards, nor make any cuts on
their body.
6They shall be holy to their God and c not profane the name of
their God. For they offer the LORD’s food offerings, d the bread of their
God; therefore they shall be holy.
7[†] e They shall not marry a prostitute or
a woman who has been defiled, neither shall they marry a woman f divorced
from her husband, for the priest is holy to his God. 8You shall sanctify him,
for he offers the bread of your God. He shall be holy to you, for g I, the
LORD, who sanctify you, h am holy.
9And the daughter of any priest, if she
profanes herself by whoring, profanes her father; i she shall be burned with
fire.
10[†] j “The priest who is chief among his brothers, on whose head the
anointing oil is poured and who has been consecrated to wear the garments,
k shall not let the hair of his head hang loose nor tear his clothes. 11He shall
not l go in to any dead bodies nor make himself unclean, even for his father
or for his mother.
12 m He shall not go out of the sanctuary, lest he n profane
the sanctuary of his God, for the o consecration of the anointing oil of his
God is on him: I am the LORD.
13And he shall take a wife in her virginity. [1]
14A widow, p or a divorced woman, or a woman who has been defiled, or a
prostitute, these he shall not marry. But he shall take as his wife a virgin [2]
of his own people, 15that he may not profane his offspring among his
people, for g I am the LORD who sanctifies him.”
16[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 17“Speak to Aaron, saying,
None of your offspring throughout their generations who has a blemish may
q approach to offer the bread of his God. 18For no one who has a blemish
shall draw near, a man r blind or lame, or one who has a mutilated face s or
a limb too long, 19or a man who has an injured foot or an injured hand, 20or
a hunchback or a dwarf or a man with a r defect in his sight or an itching
disease or scabs or t crushed testicles. 21[†]No man of the offspring of
Aaron the priest who has a blemish shall come near to u offer the LORD’s
food offerings; since he has a blemish, he shall not come near to offer the
bread of his God. 22He may eat the bread of his God, both of v the most
holy and of the w holy things, 23but he shall not go through the veil or
approach the altar, because he has a blemish, that he may not x profane my
sanctuaries, y for I am the LORD who sanctifies them.” 24So Moses spoke to
Aaron and to his sons and to all the people of Israel.