LEVITICUS 22 [†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to
Aaron and his sons so that they z abstain from the holy things of the people
of Israel, which they a dedicate to me, so that they do not b profane my holy
name: I am the LORD.
3Say to them, ‘If any one of all your offspring
throughout your generations approaches the holy things that the people of
Israel dedicate to the LORD, while c he has an uncleanness, that person shall
be cut off from my presence: I am the LORD.
4[†]None of the offspring of
Aaron who has a leprous disease or a d discharge may eat of the holy things
e until he is clean. f Whoever touches anything that is unclean through
contact with the dead or g a man who has had an emission of semen, 5and
h whoever touches a swarming thing by which he may be made unclean or
i a person from whom he may take uncleanness, whatever his uncleanness
may be— 6the person who touches such a thing shall be unclean until the
evening and shall not eat of the holy things unless he has j bathed his body
in water.
7When the sun goes down he shall be clean, and afterward he may
eat of the holy things, because k they are his food. 8 l He shall not eat what
dies of itself or is torn by beasts, and so make himself unclean by it: I am
the LORD.’ 9They shall therefore keep my charge, m lest they bear sin for it
and die thereby when they profane it: n I am the LORD who sanctifies them.
10[†] o “A lay person shall not eat of a holy thing; no foreign guest of the
priest or hired worker shall eat of a holy thing, 11but if a priest buys a
slave [1] as his property for money, the slave [2] may eat of it, and p anyone
born in his house may eat of his food. 12If a priest’s daughter marries a
layman, she shall not eat of the contribution of the holy things. 13But if a
priest’s daughter is widowed or divorced and has no child and q returns to
her father’s house, r as in her youth, she may eat of her father’s food; yet no
lay person shall eat of it. 14 s And if anyone eats of a holy thing
unintentionally, he shall add t the fifth of its value to it and give the holy
thing to the priest. 15They u shall not profane the holy things of the people
of Israel, which they contribute to the LORD,
16and so cause them m to bear
iniquity and guilt, by eating their holy things: n for I am the LORD who
sanctifies them.”
Acceptable Offerings
17[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 18“Speak to Aaron and his sons
and all the people of Israel and say to them, v When any one of the house of
Israel or of the sojourners in Israel presents a burnt offering as his offering,
for any of their vows or freewill offerings that they offer to the LORD,
19if it
is to be accepted for you it shall be a w male without blemish, of the bulls or
the sheep or the goats. 20
x You shall not offer anything that has a blemish,
for it will not be acceptable for you. 21And when anyone y offers a sacrifice
of peace offerings to the LORD z to fulfill a vow or as a freewill offering
from the herd or from the flock, to be accepted it must be perfect; there
shall be no blemish in it. 22Animals a blind or disabled or mutilated or
having a discharge or b an itch or scabs you shall not offer to the LORD or
give them to the LORD as a food c offering on the altar.
23You may present a
bull or a lamb that has a part d too long or too short for a freewill offering,
but for a vow offering it cannot be accepted. 24Any animal that has its
testicles bruised or crushed or torn or cut you shall not offer to the LORD;
you shall not do it within your land, 25neither shall you offer as e the bread
of your God any such animals gotten from a foreigner. Since there is a
f blemish in them, because of their mutilation, they will not be accepted for
you.”
26And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 27 g “When an ox or sheep or
goat is born, it shall remain seven days with its mother, and from the eighth
day on it shall be acceptable as a food offering to the LORD.
28But you shall
not kill an ox or a sheep h and her young in one day.
29[†]And when you
sacrifice a i sacrifice of thanksgiving to the LORD, you shall sacrifice it so
that you may be accepted. 30It shall be eaten on the same day; j you shall
leave none of it until morning: I am the LORD.
31 k “So you shall keep my commandments and do them: I am the LORD.
32 l And you shall not profane my holy name, that m I may be sanctified
among the people of Israel. n I am the LORD who sanctifies you, 33who
brought you out of the land of Egypt o to be your God: I am the LORD.”
Feasts of the LORD