LEVITICUS 23 [†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the people
of Israel and say to them, p These are the appointed feasts of the LORD that
you shall q proclaim as r holy convocations; they are my appointed feasts.
The Sabbath
3
s “Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day is a Sabbath of
solemn rest, a holy convocation. You shall do no work. It is a Sabbath to the
LORD in all your dwelling places.
The Passover
4[†] p “These are the appointed feasts of the LORD, the t holy convocations,
which you shall proclaim at the time appointed for them. 5 u In the first
month, on the fourteenth day of the month at twilight, [1] is the LORD’s
Passover.
6And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the Feast of
Unleavened Bread to the LORD; for seven days you shall eat unleavened
bread. 7 v On the first day you shall have a holy convocation; you shall not
do any ordinary work. 8But you shall present a food offering to the LORD
for seven days. On the seventh day is a holy convocation; you shall not do
any ordinary work.”
The Feast of Firstfruits
9[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 10“Speak to the people of Israel
and say to them, w When you come into the land that I give you and reap its
harvest, you shall bring the sheaf of x the firstfruits of your harvest to the
priest, 11and he shall y wave the sheaf before the LORD, so that you may be
accepted. On the day after the Sabbath the priest shall wave it. 12And on the
day when you y wave the sheaf, you shall offer a z male lamb a year old
without blemish as a burnt offering to the LORD.
13 a And the grain offering
with it shall be two tenths of an ephah [2] of fine flour mixed with oil, a food
offering to the LORD with a pleasing aroma, b and the drink offering with it
shall be of wine, a fourth of a hin. [3] 14And you shall eat neither bread nor
grain c parched or c fresh until this same day, until you have brought the
offering of your God: it is a statute forever throughout your generations in
all your dwellings.
The Feast of Weeks
15[†] d “You shall count seven full weeks from the day after the Sabbath,
from the day that you brought the sheaf of the y wave offering. 16You shall
count e fifty days to the day after the seventh Sabbath. Then you shall
present a grain offering of f new grain to the LORD.
17You shall bring from
your dwelling places two loaves of bread to be waved, made of two tenths
of an ephah. They shall be of fine flour, and they shall be baked with
leaven, as g firstfruits to the LORD.
18And you shall present with the bread
seven lambs a year old without blemish, and one bull from the herd and two
rams. They shall be a burnt offering to the LORD, with their grain offering
and their drink offerings, a food offering with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
19And you shall offer one h male goat for a sin offering, and two male
lambs a year old as a sacrifice of i peace offerings. 20And the priest shall
y wave them with the bread of the firstfruits as a wave offering before the
LORD, with the two lambs. j They shall be holy to the LORD for the priest.
21And you shall make a proclamation on the same day. You shall hold a
holy convocation. You shall not do any ordinary work. It is a statute forever
in all your dwelling places throughout your generations.
22“And k when you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap your
field right up to its edge, nor shall you gather the gleanings after your
harvest. You shall leave them for the poor and for the sojourner: I am the
LORD your God.”
The Feast of Trumpets
23[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 24“Speak to the people of Israel,
saying, In l the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall
observe a day of solemn rest, m a memorial proclaimed with blast of
trumpets, a holy convocation. 25You shall not do any ordinary work, and
you shall present a food offering to the LORD.”
The Day of Atonement
26[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 27“Now n on the tenth day of
this seventh month is the Day of Atonement. It shall be for you a time of
holy convocation, and you shall afflict yourselves [4] and present a food
offering to the LORD.
28And you shall not do any work on that very day, for
it is a Day of Atonement, to make atonement for you before the LORD your
God. 29For whoever is not afflicted on that very day o shall be cut off from
his people. 30And whoever does any work on that very day, that person I
will destroy from among his people. 31You shall not do any work. It is a
statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwelling places. 32It
shall be to you a Sabbath of solemn rest, and you shall afflict yourselves.
On the ninth day of the month beginning at evening, from evening to
evening shall you keep your Sabbath.”
The Feast of Booths
33[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 34“Speak to the people of Israel,
saying, p On the fifteenth day of this seventh month and for seven days is
the Feast of Booths [5] to the LORD.
35On the first day shall be a holy
convocation; you shall not do any ordinary work. 36For seven days you
shall present food offerings to the LORD. q On the eighth day you shall hold
a holy convocation and present a food offering to the LORD. It is a r solemn
assembly; you shall not do any ordinary work.
37[†] s “These are the appointed feasts of the LORD, which you shall
proclaim as times of holy convocation, for presenting to the LORD food
offerings, burnt offerings and grain offerings, sacrifices and drink offerings,
each on its proper day,
38 t besides the LORD’s Sabbaths and besides your
gifts and besides all your vow offerings and besides all your freewill
offerings, which you give to the LORD.
39“On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you have u gathered
in the produce of the land, you shall celebrate the feast of the LORD seven
days. On the first day shall be a solemn rest, and on the eighth day shall be
a solemn rest. 40And v you shall take on the first day the fruit of splendid
trees, branches of palm trees and boughs of leafy trees and willows of the
brook, and w you shall rejoice before the LORD your God seven days.
41 x You shall celebrate it as a feast to the LORD for seven days in the year. It
is a statute forever throughout your generations; you shall celebrate it in the
seventh month. 42
y You shall dwell in booths for seven days. All native
Israelites shall dwell in booths, 43that z your generations may know that I
made the people of Israel dwell in booths when I brought them out of the
land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.”
44Thus Moses a declared to the people of Israel the appointed feasts of
the LORD.
The Lamps