LEVITICUS 9 [†] r On the eighth day Moses called Aaron and his sons and
the elders of Israel, 2and he said to Aaron, s “Take for yourself a bull calf
for a sin offering and t a ram for a burnt offering, both without blemish, and
offer them before the LORD.
3And say to the people of Israel, u ‘Take a male
goat for a sin offering, and a calf and a lamb, both a year old without
blemish, for a burnt offering, 4and an ox and a ram for peace offerings, to
sacrifice before the LORD, and v a grain offering mixed with oil, for w today
the LORD will appear to you.’” 5[†]And they brought what Moses
commanded in front of the tent of meeting, and all the congregation drew
near and stood before the LORD.
6And Moses said, “This is the thing that the
LORD commanded you to do, that the glory of the LORD may appear to
you.” 7[†]Then Moses said to Aaron, “Draw near to the altar and x offer
your sin offering and your burnt offering and y make atonement for yourself
and for the people, and bring the offering of the people and make atonement
for them, as the LORD has commanded.”
8So Aaron drew near to the altar and killed the calf of the sin offering,
which was for himself. 9 z And the sons of Aaron presented the blood to
him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and a put it on the horns of the
altar and poured out the blood at the base of the altar.
10 b But the fat and the
kidneys and the long lobe of the liver from the sin offering he burned on the
altar, c as the LORD commanded Moses. 11 d The flesh and the skin he
burned up with fire outside the camp.
12Then he killed the burnt offering, and Aaron’s sons handed him the
blood, and he e threw it against the sides of the altar.
13 f And they handed
the burnt offering to him, piece by piece, and the head, and he burned them
on the altar.
14 g And he washed the entrails and the legs and burned them
with the burnt offering on the altar.
15
h Then he presented the people’s offering and took the goat of the sin
offering that was for the people and killed it and i offered it as a sin
offering, j like the first one. 16And he presented the burnt offering and
offered it k according to the l rule. 17And he presented the m grain offering,
took a handful of it, and burned it on the altar, n besides the burnt offering
of the morning.
18Then he killed the ox and the ram, o the sacrifice of peace offerings for
the people. And Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he threw it against
the sides of the altar.
19But the fat pieces of the ox and of the ram, the fat
tail and that which covers p the entrails and the kidneys and the long lobe of
the liver— 20they put the fat pieces on the breasts, q and he burned the fat
pieces on the altar,
21but the breasts and the right thigh Aaron waved r for a
wave offering before the LORD, as Moses commanded.
22[†]Then Aaron s lifted up his hands toward the people and t blessed
them, and he came down from offering the sin offering and the burnt
offering and the peace offerings. 23And Moses and Aaron went into the tent
of meeting, and when they came out they blessed the people, and u the glory
of the LORD appeared to all the people. 24And v fire came out from before
the LORD and consumed the burnt offering and the pieces of fat on the altar,
and when all the people saw it, w they shouted and x fell on their faces.
The Death of Nadab and Abihu