LEVITICUS 4 [†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the
people of Israel, saying, u If anyone sins unintentionally [1] in any of the
LORD’s commandments v about things not to be done, and does any one of
them, 3[†]if it is the anointed priest who w sins, thus bringing guilt on the
people, then he shall offer for the sin that he has committed x a bull from
the herd without blemish to the LORD for a sin offering. 4He shall bring the
bull to the y entrance of the tent of meeting before the LORD and lay his
hand on the head of the bull and kill the bull before the LORD.
5And the
anointed priest z shall take some of the blood of the bull and bring it into the
tent of meeting, 6and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood and
z sprinkle part of the blood seven times before the LORD in front of the veil
of the sanctuary.
7And the priest a shall put some of the blood on the horns
of the altar of fragrant incense before the LORD that is in the tent of meeting,
and b all the rest of the blood of the bull he shall pour out at the base of the
altar of burnt offering that is at the entrance of the tent of meeting. 8And all
the fat of the bull of the sin offering he shall remove from it, c the fat that
covers the entrails and all the fat that is on the entrails 9 d and the two
kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins and the long lobe of the liver
that he shall remove with the kidneys 10(just as these are taken from the ox
of the sacrifice of the peace offerings); and the priest shall burn them on the
altar of burnt offering. 11But e the skin of the bull and all its flesh, with its
head, its legs, its entrails, and its dung— 12all the rest of the bull—he shall
carry f outside the camp to a clean place, to the ash heap, and shall g burn it
up on a fire of wood. On the ash heap it shall be burned up.
13[†] h “If the whole congregation of Israel sins unintentionally [2] and
i the thing is hidden from the eyes of the assembly, and they do any one of
the things that by the LORD’s commandments ought not to be done, and they
realize their guilt, [3] 14 j when the sin which they have committed becomes
known, the assembly shall offer a bull from the herd for a sin offering and
bring it in front of the tent of meeting. 15And the elders of the congregation
k shall lay their hands on the head of the bull before the LORD, and the bull
shall be killed before the LORD.
16Then l the anointed priest shall bring
some of the blood of the bull into the tent of meeting, 17and the priest shall
dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD in
front of the veil. 18And he shall put some of the blood on the horns of the
altar that is in the tent of meeting before the LORD, and the rest of the blood
he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering that is at the
entrance of the tent of meeting. 19And all its fat he shall take from it and
burn on the altar.
20Thus shall he do with the bull. As he did m with the bull
of the sin offering, so shall he do with this. n And the priest shall make
atonement for them, and they shall be forgiven. 21And he shall carry the
bull f outside the camp and burn it up as he burned the first bull; it is the sin
offering for the assembly.
22[†]“When a leader sins, o doing unintentionally any one of all the
things that by the commandments of the LORD his God ought not to be
done, and realizes his guilt, 23or p the sin which he has committed is made
known to him, he shall bring as his offering a goat, a male without blemish,
24and q shall lay his hand on the head of the goat and kill it in the place
where they kill the burnt offering before the LORD; it is a sin offering.
25 r Then the priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering with his
finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering and pour out the
rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering. 26And all its fat he
shall burn on the altar, like s the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings. So
t the priest shall make atonement for him for his sin, and he shall be
forgiven.
27“If u anyone of the common people sins unintentionally in doing any
one of the things that by the LORD’s commandments ought not to be done,
and realizes his guilt, 28 v or the sin which he has committed is made known
to him, he shall bring for his offering a goat, a female without blemish, for
his sin which he has committed. 29 w And he shall lay his hand on the head
of the sin offering and kill the sin offering in the place of burnt offering.
30And the priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the
horns of the altar of burnt offering and pour out all the rest of its blood at
the base of the altar.
31And x all its fat he shall remove, y as the fat is
removed from the peace offerings, and the priest shall burn it on the altar
for a z pleasing aroma to the LORD. a And the priest shall make atonement
for him, and he shall be forgiven.
32“If he brings a lamb as his offering for a sin offering, he shall bring b a
female without blemish 33 w and lay his hand on the head of the sin offering
and kill it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering.
34Then the priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering with his
finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering and pour out all
the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
35And all its fat he shall remove
c as the fat of the lamb is removed from the sacrifice of peace offerings, and
the priest shall burn it on the altar, on top of the LORD’s food offerings.
d And the priest shall make atonement for him for the sin which he has
committed, and he shall be forgiven.