LEVITICUS 20 [†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Say to the people of
Israel, o Any one of the people of Israel or of the strangers who sojourn in
Israel who gives any of his children to Molech shall surely be put to death.
The people of the land shall stone him with stones. 3 p I myself will set my
face against that man and will cut him off from among his people, because
he has given one of his children to Molech, to make my sanctuary q unclean
and r to profane my holy name. 4And if the people of the land do at all close
their eyes to that man when he gives one of his children to Molech, and do
not s put him to death, 5then I will set my face against that man and against
his clan and will cut them off from among their people, him and all who
follow him in t whoring after Molech.
6“If u a person turns to mediums and necromancers, whoring after them,
v I will set my face against that person and will cut him off from among his
people. 7[†] w Consecrate yourselves, therefore, and be holy, for I am the
LORD your God. 8
x Keep my statutes and do them; y I am the LORD who
sanctifies you. 9[†]For z anyone who curses his father or his mother shall
surely be put to death; he has cursed his father or his mother; a his blood is
upon him.
Punishments for Sexual Immorality
10[†]“If a b man commits adultery with the wife of [1] his neighbor, both the
adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death. 11 c If a man lies
with his father’s wife, he has uncovered his father’s nakedness; both of
them shall surely be put to death; their blood is upon them. 12
d If a man lies
with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death; they
have committed e perversion; their blood is upon them. 13 f If a man lies
with a male as with a woman, both of them have committed an
abomination; they shall surely be put to death; their blood is upon them.
14 g If a man takes a woman and her mother also, it is depravity; he and they
shall be burned with fire, that there may be no depravity among you. 15
h If a
man lies with an animal, he shall surely be put to death, and you shall kill
the animal. 16 h If a woman approaches any animal and lies with it, you shall
kill the woman and the animal; they shall surely be put to death; their blood
is upon them.
17[†] i “If a man takes his sister, a daughter of his father or a daughter of
his mother, and sees her nakedness, and she sees his nakedness, it is a
disgrace, and they shall be cut off in the sight of the children of their
people. He has uncovered his sister’s nakedness, and he shall bear his
iniquity.
18
j If a man lies with a woman during her menstrual period and
uncovers her nakedness, he has made naked her fountain, and she has
uncovered the fountain of her blood. Both of them shall be cut off from
among their people. 19 k You shall not uncover the nakedness of your
mother’s sister or of your father’s sister, for that is to make naked l one’s
relative; they shall bear their iniquity.
20 m If a man lies with his uncle’s
wife, he has uncovered his uncle’s nakedness; they shall bear their sin; they
shall die childless. 21
n If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is impurity. [2] He
has uncovered his brother’s nakedness; they shall be childless.
You Shall Be Holy
22[†] o “You shall therefore keep all my statutes and all my rules and do
them, that the land where I am bringing you to live may not p vomit you
out. 23 q And you shall not walk in the customs of the nation that I am
driving out before you, for they did all these things, and therefore I detested
them. 24But r I have said to you, ‘You shall inherit their land, and I will give
it to you to possess, a land s flowing with milk and honey.’ I am the LORD
your God, t who has separated you from the peoples. 25 u You shall therefore
separate the clean beast from the unclean, and the unclean bird from the
clean. You shall not make yourselves detestable by beast or by bird or by
anything with which the ground crawls, which I have set apart for you to
hold unclean. 26 v You shall be holy to me, w for I the LORD am holy and
have separated you from the peoples, that you should be mine.
27[†] x “A man or a woman who is a medium or a necromancer shall
surely be put to death. They shall be y stoned with stones; z their blood shall
be upon them.”
Holiness and the Priests