LEVITICUS 5 [†]“If anyone sins in that he hears a public e adjuration to
testify, and though he is a witness, whether he has seen or come to know the
matter, yet does not speak, he shall f bear his iniquity; 2or g if anyone
touches an unclean thing, whether a carcass of an unclean wild animal or a
carcass of unclean livestock or a carcass of unclean swarming things, and it
is hidden from him and he has become unclean, and he realizes his guilt; 3or
if he touches h human uncleanness, of whatever sort the uncleanness may
be with which one becomes unclean, and it is hidden from him, when he
comes to know it, and realizes his guilt; 4or if anyone utters with his lips a
i rash oath to do evil or to do good, any sort of rash oath that people j swear,
and it is hidden from him, when he comes to know it, and he realizes his
guilt in any of these; 5when he realizes his guilt in any of these and
k confesses the sin he has committed, 6he shall bring to the LORD as his
compensation [1] for the sin that he has committed, a female from the flock,
a lamb or a goat, for a sin offering. And the priest shall make atonement for
him for his sin.
7[†]“But l if he cannot afford a lamb, then he shall bring to the LORD as
his compensation for the sin that he has committed two m turtledoves or two
pigeons, [2] one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering. 8He
shall bring them to the priest, who shall offer first the one for the sin
offering. He shall n wring its head from its neck n but shall not sever it
completely,
9and he shall sprinkle some of the blood of the sin offering on
the side of the altar, while o the rest of the blood shall be drained out p at the
base of the altar; it is a sin offering. 10Then he shall offer the second for a
burnt offering according to the rule. q And the priest shall make atonement
for him for the sin that he has committed, and he shall be forgiven.
11“But if he cannot afford two turtledoves or two pigeons, then he shall
bring as his offering for the sin that he has committed a r tenth of an
ephah [3] of fine flour for a sin offering. He r shall put no oil on it and shall
put no frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering. 12And he shall bring it to
s the priest, and the priest shall take a handful of it as its memorial portion
and t burn this on the altar, on the LORD’s food offerings; it is a sin offering.
13Thus q the priest shall make atonement for him for the sin which he has
committed in any one of these things, and he shall be forgiven. And the
remainder [4] shall be for the priest, as in the grain offering.”
Laws for Guilt Offerings
14[†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 15 u “If anyone commits a breach of
faith and sins unintentionally in any of the holy things of the LORD, v he
shall bring to the LORD as his compensation, a ram without blemish out of
the flock, valued [5] in silver shekels, [6] according to the w shekel of the
sanctuary, for a guilt offering. 16He shall also make restitution for what he
has done amiss in the holy thing and x shall add a fifth to it and give it to the
priest. q And the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the
guilt offering, and he shall be forgiven.
17 y “If anyone sins, doing any of the things that by the LORD’s
commandments ought not to be done, z though he did not know it, then
realizes his guilt, he shall bear his iniquity.
18
a He shall bring to the priest a
ram without blemish out of the flock, or its equivalent for a guilt offering,
and q the priest shall make atonement for him for the mistake that he made
unintentionally, and he shall be forgiven. 19It is a guilt offering; he has
indeed incurred guilt before [7] the LORD.”