LUKE 1 [†]Inasmuch as many have undertaken to compile a narrative of the
things that a have been accomplished among us, 2[†] b just as those who
c from the beginning were d eyewitnesses and e ministers of f the word
g have delivered them to us, 3it seemed good to me also, having followed all
things closely for some time past, to write h an orderly account for you,
i most excellent j Theophilus, 4that you may have k certainty concerning the
things l you have been taught.
Birth of John the Baptist Foretold
5[†] m In the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a priest named
Zechariah, [1] n of o the division of Abijah. And he had a wife from the
daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 6And they were both
p righteous before God, walking q blamelessly in all the commandments
and statutes of the Lord. 7But they had no child, because r Elizabeth was
barren, and s both were advanced in years.
8Now t while he was serving as priest before God when u his division
was on duty,
9according to the custom of the priesthood, he was chosen by
lot v to enter w the temple of the Lord and burn incense. 10And the whole
multitude of the people x were praying y outside at the hour of incense.
11And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side
of z the altar of incense. 12[†]And Zechariah was troubled when he saw him,
and a fear fell upon him. 13[†]But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid,
Zechariah, for b your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will
bear you a son, and c you shall call his name John. 14And you will have joy
and gladness, and many will d rejoice at his birth, 15[†]for he will be e great
before the Lord. And f he must not drink wine or strong g drink, and g he
will be h filled with the Holy Spirit, i even from his mother’s womb.
16[†]And he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God,
17and j he will go before him k in the spirit and power of Elijah, l to turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children, and m the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just, n to make ready for the Lord a people prepared.”
18And Zechariah said to the angel, o “How shall I know this? For I am an
old man, and my wife is advanced in years.” 19[†]And the angel answered
him, “I am p Gabriel. q I stand in the presence of God, and I was sent to
speak to you and to bring you this good news. 20And behold, r you will be
silent and unable to speak until the day that these things take place, because
you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time.” 21And
the people were waiting for Zechariah, and they were wondering at his
delay in s the temple. 22[†]And when he came out, he was unable to speak
to them, and they realized that he had seen a vision in s the temple. And t he
kept making signs to them and remained mute. 23And u when his time of
v service was ended, he went to his home.
24[†]After these days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and for five months
she kept herself hidden, saying, 25“Thus the Lord has done for me in the
days when he looked on me, w to take away my reproach among people.”
Birth of Jesus Foretold
26[†]In the sixth month the angel x Gabriel was sent from God to a city of
Galilee named y Nazareth, 27[†] z to a virgin betrothed [2] to a man whose
name was Joseph, a of the house of David. And the virgin’s name was Mary.
28And he came to her and said, “Greetings, b O favored one, c the Lord is
with you!” [3] 29But d she was greatly troubled at the saying, and tried to
discern what sort of greeting this might be. 30And the angel said to her, “Do
not be afraid, Mary, for e you have found favor with God. 31And behold,
f you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and g you shall call his
name Jesus. 32[†]He will be great and will be called the Son of h the Most
High. And the Lord God i will give to him the throne of j his father David,
33and he will reign over the house of Jacob k forever, and of his kingdom
there will be no end.”
34And Mary said to the angel, “How will this be, since I am a virgin?” [4]
35[†]And the angel answered her, l “The Holy Spirit will come upon you,
and the power of h the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child
to be born [5] will be called m holy— n the Son of God. 36And behold, your
relative Elizabeth in her old age has also conceived a son, and this is the
sixth month with her o who was called barren. 37For p nothing will be
impossible with God.” 38And Mary said, “Behold, I am the servant [6] of the
Lord; let it be to me according to your word.” And q the angel departed
from her.
Mary Visits Elizabeth
39[†]In those days Mary arose and went with haste into r the hill country, to
a town in Judah, 40and she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted
Elizabeth. 41And when Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the baby
leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth s was filled with the Holy Spirit, 42and
she exclaimed with a loud cry, t “Blessed are you among women, and
u blessed is v the fruit of your womb! 43And why is this granted to me that
the mother of w my Lord should come to me? 44[†]For behold, when the
sound of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for
joy.
45And x blessed is she who believed that there would be [7] a fulfillment
of what was spoken to her from the Lord.”
Mary’s Song of Praise: The Magnificat
46[†]And Mary said,
y “My z soul a magnifies the Lord,
47
b and my z spirit rejoices in c God my Savior,
48[†] for d he has looked on the humble estate of his servant.
For behold, from now on all generations e will call me blessed;
49 for f he who is mighty g has done great things for me,
and h holy is his name.
50[†] And i his mercy is for those who fear him
from generation to generation.
51
j He has shown strength with his arm;
k he has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts;
52 j he has brought down the mighty from their thrones
l and exalted those of humble estate;
53 he has filled m the hungry with good things,
and the rich n he has sent away empty.
54 He has o helped p his servant Israel,
q in remembrance of his mercy,
55 r as he spoke to our fathers,
q to Abraham and to his offspring forever.”
56And Mary remained with her about three months and returned to her
home.
The Birth of John the Baptist
57Now the time came for Elizabeth to give birth, and she bore a son.
58[†]And her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord s had shown great
mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
59[†]And t on the eighth day they
came to circumcise the child. And they would have called him Zechariah
after his father,
60[†]but his mother answered, “No; u he shall be called
John.” 61And they said to her, “None of your relatives is called by this
name.” 62[†]And v they made signs to his father, inquiring what he wanted
him to be called. 63And he asked for w a writing tablet and wrote, u “His
name is John.” And they all wondered. 64
x And immediately his mouth was
opened and his tongue y loosed, and he spoke, z blessing God. 65And a fear
came on all their neighbors. And all these things were talked about through
all b the hill country of Judea, 66and all who heard them c laid them up in
their hearts, saying, “What then will this child be?” For d the hand of the
Lord was with him.
Zechariah’s Prophecy
67[†]And his father Zechariah e was filled with the Holy Spirit and
f prophesied, saying,
68[†] g “Blessed be the Lord h God of Israel,
for he has i visited and j redeemed his people
69[†] and k has raised up l a horn of salvation for us
m in the house of his servant David,
70[†] n as o he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
71 p that we should be saved from our enemies
and from the hand of all who hate us;
72
q to show the mercy promised to our fathers
and r to remember his holy s covenant,
73 t the oath that he swore to our father Abraham, to grant us
74 that we, being delivered from the hand of our enemies,
might serve him u without fear,
75 v in holiness and righteousness before him w all our days.
76[†] And you, child, will be called x the prophet of y the Most High;
for z you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,
77 to give knowledge of salvation to his people
a in the forgiveness of their sins,
78[†] because of the b tender mercy of our God,
whereby c the sunrise shall d visit us [8] e from on high
79 to f give light to g those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death,
to guide our feet into h the way of i peace.”
80[†] j And the child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was k in the
wilderness until the day of his public appearance to Israel.
The Birth of Jesus Christ