MALACHI 1 [†]The oracle of the word of the LORD to Israel by
Malachi. [1]
The LORD’s Love for Israel
2[†] a “I have loved you,” says the LORD. b But you say, “How have you
loved us?” “Is not Esau c Jacob’s brother?” declares the LORD. “Yet d I have
loved Jacob 3but Esau I have hated. e I have laid waste his hill country and
left his heritage to jackals of the desert.” 4If Edom says, “We are shattered
but we will rebuild the ruins,” the LORD of hosts says, “They may build, but
I will tear down, and they will be called ‘the wicked country,’ and ‘the
people with whom the LORD is angry forever.’” 5 f Your own eyes shall see
this, and you shall say, “Great is the LORD beyond the border of Israel!”
The Priests’ Polluted Offerings
6[†] g “A son honors his father, and a servant his master. If then I am h a
father, where is my honor? And if I am i a master, where is my fear? says
the LORD of hosts to you, O priests, who despise my name. b But you say,
‘How have we despised your name?’ 7 j By offering polluted food upon my
altar. b But you say, ‘How have we polluted you?’ By saying that k the
LORD’s table may be despised. 8
l When you offer blind animals in sacrifice,
is that not evil? And when you offer those that are lame or sick, is that not
evil? Present that to your governor; will he accept you or show you favor?
says the LORD of hosts. 9And now m entreat the favor of God, that he may
be gracious to us. With such a gift from your hand, n will he show favor to
any of you? says the LORD of hosts. 10
o Oh that there were one among you
who would shut the doors, that you might not kindle fire on my altar in
vain! I have no pleasure in you, says the LORD of hosts, p and I will not
accept an offering from your hand. 11[†]For from the rising of the sun to its
setting my name q will be [2] great among the nations, and in every place
incense will be offered to my name, and a pure offering. For my name q will
be great among the nations, says the LORD of hosts. 12But you profane it
when you say that r the Lord’s table is polluted, and its fruit, that is, its food
may be despised. 13But you say, s ‘What a weariness this is,’ and you snort
at it, says the LORD of hosts. t You bring what has been taken by violence or
is lame or sick, and this you bring as your offering! Shall I accept that from
your hand? says the LORD.
14Cursed be the cheat who has u a male in his
flock, and v vows it, and yet sacrifices to the Lord what is blemished. For
w I am a great King, says the LORD of hosts, and my name x will be feared
among the nations.
The LORD Rebukes the Priests
MALACHI 2 “And now, y O priests, z this command is for you. 2[†] a If you
will not listen, if you will not take it to heart to give honor to my name, says
the LORD of hosts, then I will send b the curse upon you and I will curse
c your blessings. Indeed, I have already cursed them, because you do not lay
it to heart. 3Behold, d I will rebuke your offspring, [1] and e spread dung on
your faces, the f dung of your offerings, and you shall be taken away with
it. [2] 4So shall you know that I have sent g this command to you, that h my
covenant with Levi may stand, says the LORD of hosts. 5My covenant with
him was one of life and i peace, and I gave them to him. j It was a covenant
of fear, and he feared me. He stood in awe of my name. 6 k True
instruction [3] was in his mouth, and no wrong was found on his lips. He
walked with me in peace and uprightness, and he l turned many from
iniquity.
7For m the lips of a priest should guard knowledge, and people [4]
should seek instruction from his mouth, for he is the messenger of the LORD
of hosts. 8But you have turned aside from the way. n You have caused many
to stumble by your instruction. You have corrupted o the covenant of Levi,
says the LORD of hosts, 9and so p I make you despised and abased before all
the people, inasmuch as you do not keep my ways but q show partiality in
your instruction.”
Judah Profaned the Covenant
10[†]Have we not all r one Father? Has not s one God created us? Why then
are we t faithless to one another, profaning the covenant of our fathers?
11Judah has been t faithless, and abomination has been committed in Israel
and in Jerusalem. For u Judah has profaned the sanctuary of the LORD,
which he loves, and has married the daughter of a foreign god. 12May the
LORD cut off from the tents of Jacob any descendant [5] of the man who does
this, who v brings an offering to the LORD of hosts!
13[†]And this second thing you do. w You cover the LORD’s altar with
tears, with weeping and groaning because he no longer regards the offering
or accepts it with favor from your hand. 14
x But you say, “Why does he
not?” Because the LORD y was witness between you and the wife of your
youth, z to whom t you have been faithless, though she is your companion
and your wife by covenant. 15[†] a Did he not make them one, with a portion
of the Spirit in their union? [6] And what was the one God [7] seeking? [8]
b Godly offspring. So guard yourselves [9] in your spirit, and let none of you
be t faithless to the wife of your youth. 16[†]“For c the man who does not
love his wife but divorces her, [10] says the LORD, the God of Israel,
covers [11] his garment with violence, says the LORD of hosts. So guard
yourselves in your spirit, and t do not be faithless.”
The Messenger of the LORD
17[†] d You have wearied the LORD with your words. x But you say, “How
have we wearied him?” e By saying, “Everyone who does evil is good in
the sight of the LORD, and he delights in them.” Or by asking, f “Where is
the God of justice?”