MATTHEW 20 [†]“For the kingdom of heaven is like a master of a house
who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
2[†]After agreeing with the laborers for a denarius [1] a day, he sent them
into his vineyard. 3And going out about the third hour he saw others
standing idle in the marketplace, 4and to them he said, ‘You go into the
vineyard too, and whatever is right I will give you.’ 5So they went. Going
out again about the sixth hour and the ninth hour, he did the same. 6And
g about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing. And he
said to them, ‘Why do you stand here idle all day?’ 7They said to him,
‘Because no one has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You go into the vineyard
too.’ 8And h when evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his
i foreman, ‘Call the laborers and pay them their wages, beginning with the
last, up to the first.’ 9And when those hired about the eleventh hour came,
each of them received a denarius. 10Now when those hired first came, they
thought they would receive more, but each of them also received a denarius.
11And on receiving it they grumbled at the master of the house, 12saying,
‘These last worked only one hour, and you have made them equal to us who
have borne the burden of the day and j the scorching heat.’ 13But he replied
to one of them, k ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Did you not agree with
me for a denarius? 14Take l what belongs to you and go. I choose to give to
this last worker as I give to you. 15
m Am I not allowed to do what I choose
with what belongs to me? Or n do you begrudge my generosity?’ [2] 16[†]So
o the last will be first, and the first last.”
Jesus Foretells His Death a Third Time
17[†] p And as Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples
aside, and on the way he said to them, 18“See, q we are going up to
Jerusalem. And the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests
and scribes, and they will r condemn him to death 19and s deliver him over
to the Gentiles t to be mocked and flogged and u crucified, and he will be
raised on v the third day.”
A Mother’s Request
20[†] w Then x the mother of the sons of Zebedee came up to him with her
sons, and y kneeling before him she asked him for something. 21[†]And he
said to her, “What do you want?” She said to him, “Say that these two sons
of mine z are to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left, a in your
kingdom.” 22[†]Jesus answered, b “You do not know what you are asking.
Are you able c to drink the cup that I am to drink?” They said to him, “We
are able.” 23[†]He said to them, d “You will drink e my cup, but to sit at my
right hand and at my left is not mine to grant, f but it is for those for whom
it has been g prepared by my Father.” 24[†]And when the ten heard it, they
were indignant at the two brothers. 25But Jesus called them to him and said,
h “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles i lord it over them, and their
great ones exercise authority over them. 26
j It shall not be so among you.
But whoever would be great among you must be your servant, [3] 27and
whoever would be first among you must be your slave, [4] 28[†]even as the
Son of Man came not to be served but k to serve, and l to give his life as a
ransom for m many.”
Jesus Heals Two Blind Men
29[†] n And as they went out of Jericho, a great crowd followed him.
30[†]And behold, there were two blind men sitting by the roadside, and
when they heard that Jesus was passing by, they cried out, “Lord, [5] have
mercy on us, o Son of David!” 31The crowd p rebuked them, telling them to
be silent, but they cried out all the more, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of
David!” 32And stopping, Jesus called them and said, “What do you want me
to do for you?” 33They said to him, “Lord, let our eyes be opened.” 34And
Jesus in pity touched their eyes, and immediately they recovered their sight
and followed him.
The Triumphal Entry