MATTHEW 2 [†]Now h after Jesus was born in i Bethlehem of Judea j in the
days of Herod the king, behold, wise men [1] from k the east came to
Jerusalem, 2[†]saying, “Where is he who has been born l king of the Jews?
For we saw m his star when it rose [2] and have come to n worship him.”
3When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with
him; 4[†]and assembling all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he
inquired of them where o the Christ was to be born. 5[†]They told him, “In
Bethlehem of Judea, for so it is written by the prophet:
6 p “‘And you, O Bethlehem, in the land of Judah,
are by no means least among the rulers of Judah;
for from you shall come a ruler
who will q shepherd my people Israel.’”
7Then Herod summoned the wise men secretly and ascertained from
them what time the star had appeared. 8And he sent them to Bethlehem,
saying, “Go and search diligently for the child, and when you have found
him, bring me word, that I too may come and worship him.” 9[†]After
listening to the king, they went on their way. And behold, the star that they
had seen when it rose went before them until it came to rest over the place
where the child was. 10When they saw the star, they rejoiced exceedingly
with great joy.
11[†]And going into the house they saw the child with Mary
his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him. Then, opening their
treasures, r they offered him gifts, s gold and t frankincense and u myrrh.
12And v being warned w in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed to
their own country by another way.
The Flight to Egypt
13[†]Now when they had departed, behold, x an angel of the Lord appeared
to Joseph in a dream and said, “Rise, take the child and his mother, and flee
to Egypt, and remain there until I tell you, for Herod is about to search for
the child, to destroy him.” 14And he rose and took the child and his mother
by night and departed to Egypt 15[†]and remained there until the death of
Herod. y This was to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet, z “Out
of Egypt I called my son.”
Herod Kills the Children
16[†]Then Herod, when he saw that he had been tricked by the wise men,
became furious, and he sent and killed all the male children in Bethlehem
and in all that region who were two years old or under, according to the
time that he had ascertained from the wise men. 17[†] a Then was fulfilled
what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah:
18 b “A voice was heard in Ramah,
weeping and loud lamentation,
Rachel weeping for her children;
she refused to be comforted, because they c are no more.”
The Return to Nazareth
19But when Herod died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to
Joseph in Egypt, 20saying, “Rise, take the child and his mother and go to the
land of Israel, for d those who sought the child’s life are dead.” 21And he
rose and took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel.
22[†]But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of
his father Herod, he was afraid to go there, and e being warned in a dream
he withdrew to the district of Galilee. 23[†]And he went and lived in a city
called f Nazareth, g so that what was spoken by the prophets might be
fulfilled, that he would be called a Nazarene.
John the Baptist Prepares the Way