MATTHEW 7 [†] r “Judge not, that you be not judged. 2
s For with the
judgment you pronounce you will be judged, and t with the measure you
use it will be measured to you. 3[†]Why do you see the speck that is in your
brother’s eye, but u do not notice the log that is in your own eye? 4Or how
can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when
there is the log in your own eye? 5You hypocrite, first take the log out of
your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your
brother’s eye.
6[†] v “Do not give w dogs what is holy, and do not throw your x pearls
before pigs, lest they trample them underfoot and turn to attack you.
Ask, and It Will Be Given
7[†] y “Ask, z and it will be given to you; a seek, and you will find; b knock,
and it will be opened to you. 8For everyone who asks receives, and the one
who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened. 9Or which
one of you, if his son asks him for c bread, will give him c a stone? 10Or if
he asks for a fish, will give him a serpent? 11[†]If you then, d who are evil,
know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will z your
Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him!
The Golden Rule
12[†]“So e whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them,
for this is f the Law and the Prophets.
13[†] g “Enter by the narrow gate. For the gate is wide and the way is
easy [1] that leads to destruction, and those who enter by it are many.
14For
the gate is narrow and h the way is hard that leads to life, and i those who
find it are few.
A Tree and Its Fruit
15[†] j “Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing but
inwardly are k ravenous wolves. 16You will recognize them l by their fruits.
Are grapes gathered from thornbushes, or figs from thistles? 17So, m every
healthy tree bears good fruit, but the diseased tree bears bad fruit. 18A
healthy tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor can a diseased tree bear good fruit.
19 n Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the
fire. 20Thus you will recognize them l by their fruits.
I Never Knew You
21 o “Not everyone who p says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will q enter the kingdom
of heaven, but the one who r does the will of my Father who is in heaven.
22[†] s On that day t many will say to me, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not
u prophesy in your name, and cast out demons v in your name, and do many
mighty works in your name?’ 23
t And then will I declare to them, ‘I w never
knew you; x depart from me, y you workers of lawlessness.’
Build Your House on the Rock
24[†] z “Everyone then who hears these words of mine and does them will be
like a a wise man who built his house on the rock. 25[†]And the rain fell,
and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house, but it did
not fall, because it had been founded on the rock. 26And everyone who
hears these words of mine and does not do them will be like a a foolish man
who built his house on the sand. 27And the rain fell, and the floods came,
and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell, and great was
the fall of it.”
The Authority of Jesus
28[†]And when Jesus finished these sayings, b the crowds were astonished
at his teaching, 29 c for he was teaching them as one who had authority, and
not as their scribes.
Jesus Cleanses a Leper