NAHUM 3 [†] Woe to p the bloody city,
all full of lies and plunder—
q no end to the prey!
2 The crack of the whip, and r rumble of the wheel,
s galloping horse and t bounding chariot!
3 Horsemen charging,
flashing sword and u glittering spear,
v hosts of slain,
heaps of corpses,
dead bodies without end—
they stumble over the bodies!
4[†] And all for the countless whorings of the w prostitute,
x graceful and of deadly charms,
who betrays nations with her whorings,
and peoples with her charms.
5[†] m Behold, I am against you,
declares the LORD of hosts,
and y will lift up your skirts over your face;
and I will make nations look at z your nakedness
and kingdoms at your shame.
6 I will throw filth at you
and a treat you with contempt
and make you b a spectacle.
7[†] And all who look at you c will shrink from you and say,
“Wasted is d Nineveh; e who will grieve for her?”
f Where shall I seek comforters for you?
8[†] g Are you better than h Thebes [1]
that sat i by the Nile,
with water around her,
her rampart a sea,
and water her wall?
9[†] j Cush was her strength;
Egypt too, and that without limit;
k Put and the l Libyans were her [2] helpers.
10[†] m Yet she became an exile;
she went into captivity;
n her infants were dashed in pieces
at the head of every street;
for her honored men o lots were cast,
p and all her great men were bound in chains.
11[†] q You also will be drunken;
you will go into hiding;
r you will seek a refuge from the enemy.
12[†] All your fortresses are s like fig trees
with first-ripe figs—
if shaken they fall
into the mouth of the eater.
13 Behold, your troops
t are women in your midst.
The gates of your land
are wide open to your enemies;
fire has devoured your bars.
14[†] u Draw water for the siege;
r strengthen your forts;
go into the clay;
tread the mortar;
take hold of the brick mold!
15[†] There will the fire devour you;
the sword will cut you off.
It will v devour you w like the locust.
Multiply yourselves w like the locust;
multiply w like the grasshopper!
16[†] You increased x your merchants
more than the stars of the heavens.
w The locust spreads its wings and flies away.
17[†] Your z princes are w like grasshoppers,
a your scribes [3] like clouds of locusts
settling on the fences
in a day of cold—
when the sun rises, they fly away;
no one knows where they are.
18[†] Your shepherds b are asleep,
O king of Assyria;
c your nobles slumber.
Your people d are scattered on the mountains
with none to gather them.
19 There is no easing your hurt;
e your wound is grievous.
All who hear the news about you
f clap their hands over you.
For g upon whom has not come
your unceasing evil?
Study Notes for Nahum
1:1 Introduction. This is the only OT book that begins with a “double
title.” Oracle describes a prophetic proclamation (see note on Hab. 1:1).
Vision indicates how God communicated the contents of the book to
Nahum.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:2–8 A Psalm Descriptively Praising the Lord.
These verses praise God as he has been and will be throughout world
history. It presents God’s attitude toward, and action relating to, his
enemies and his people.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:2–3a The Lord is jealous to protect his relationship
with his people. avenging. God’s holy anger defends his word and his
people. keeps wrath. . . . slow to anger (compare Ex. 34:6). God waits to
display his anger until an appropriate time. great in power. If God delays
his judgment, it is not due to any lack of power on his part. will by no
means clear the guilty. Compare Ex. 34:7.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:4–5 Rebukes the sea . . . dries up . . . rivers recalls
the exodus from Egypt (Exodus 14) and the conquest of Canaan (Joshua 3–
4). Bashan was famous for its rich pasturelands. Carmel was well known
for its beauty and its fruitful countryside. Lebanon was noted for its forests.
Hills and mountains are symbols of permanence, but even they cannot
stand before God.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:6 Fire is a frequent OT image describing God’s wrath
(e.g., Gen. 19:24; Ps. 11:6). Rocks, the hardest objects in nature, are easily
shattered by the Lord.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:7 In contrast to his anger, God is good to his people.
The Lord is the never-failing stronghold for his people (e.g., Ps. 27:1;
37:39), whom he knows with love and affection.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:8 A striking contrast to v. 7. Like an overflowing flood,
God’s judgment is overwhelming; Nineveh was to be destroyed as by a
flood (see 2:6, 8). complete end . . . darkness. God’s judgment will end
with death and everlasting separation from him.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:9–15 The Lord’ s Coming Judgment on Nineveh
and Deliverance of Judah. In these verses Nahum alternates between the
Lord’s coming judgment on Nineveh and his gracious deliverance of
Judah.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:9 plot. Plots to harm God’s people are ultimately
against the LORD himself. Trouble (see v. 7) is what Judah experienced
from Assyria.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:10 Entangled thorns can be thrown all at once into the
fire, just as the Assyrians as a whole will be wiped out. Like drunkards,
the Assyrians will be unable to defend themselves against their attackers.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:11 Worthless counselor refers either to a particular
wicked Assyrian king or to the series of kings who reigned in Nineveh after
Sennacherib made that city the capital.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:12b Though I have afflicted you. Suddenly God turns
his attention to Judah (as he will again in v. 15). This dramatic change in the
flow of v. 12 emphasizes the announcement of good news that follows. I
will afflict you no more. Since God would overthrow Nineveh, the
Assyrians would never again be Judah’s oppressor.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:13 his yoke. The Assyrian monarchs’ burdensome rule
over Judah (see 2 Kings 18:13). break . . . burst. Judah was controlled by
Assyria from about 734/733 B.C. (during the reign of Ahaz; 2 Kings 16:7–8)
until the reign of Josiah (640–609), when Assyria began to decline rapidly
and finally ceased to be a nation.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:14 You is masculine singular in Hebrew. Nahum
suddenly switches to directly addressing the Assyrian king(s) (see v. 11).
The Assyrian monarchy would come to a decisive end. the house of your
gods I will cut off. Complete defeat of the Assyrian ruler would also be
marked by the defilement of his temple and the destruction or removal of
his idols. These represented the gods who he believed gave him power.
Archaeologists have confirmed the complete destruction of Nineveh’s
temples.
Afflictions of Assyria against Israel
The Neo-Assyrian period (935–609 B.C.) brought renewed threats from the
Assyrians. God used the Assyrians to chasten wayward Israel. In Nah. 1:12
the Lord tells Judah that “Though I have afflicted you [through the
Assyrians], I will afflict you no longer.”
Assyrian
Ruler
Reign Affliction Significance and Biblical References
858–
Shalmaneser
824
III
B.C.
Adad-nirari III 811–
783
Exacted tribute from “Jehu, son
of Omri” according to the Black
Obelisk
Exacted tribute from Jehoash of
Israel
Defeated at Qarqar in 853 B.C. by a Syrian coalition that included
“Ahab the Israelite”
Tiglath-pileser
III (Pul)
745–
727
Invaded the land and exacted
tribute
His attacks on Damascus enabled Jehoash to recover Israelite cities lost
previously to Hazael (2 Kings 13:25)
To avoid deportation, Menahem paid tribute to Tiglath-pileser III (Pul)
(2 Kings 15:19–20); Pul deported the Transjordanian tribes (2 Kings
15:29; 1 Chron. 5:26); Pul aided Ahaz of Judah against Rezin of
Damascus and Pekah of Israel (2 Kings 16:5–10; 2 Chron. 28:16–21)
Shalmaneser V 727–
722
Sargon II 722–
705
Exacted tribute from Hoshea of
Israel; took the northern
kingdom (Israel) into exile
Took credit for the invasion and
exile of the northern kingdom
(Israel) that began under
Shalmaneser V
Hoshea refused to pay tribute and sought Egypt for help, the Assyrians
besieged Samaria (2 Kings 17:3–6; 18:9–12)
Sargon II may be the unnamed king of Assyria in 2 Kings 17:6
Sennacherib 705–
681 Invaded Judah
Esarhaddon
681–
669
Exacted tribute from Manasseh
of Judah
Ashurbanipal 669–
627 Exacted tribute
Sennacherib besieged Lachish and forced tribute from Hezekiah (2
Kings 18:13–16); he besieged Jerusalem and demanded Hezekiah’s
surrender (2 Kings 18:17–19:9); the Lord delivered Jerusalem from
Sennacherib (2 Kings 19:10–37). See also 2 Chronicles 32; Isaiah 36–
37
Mentioned at 2 Kings 19:37 as successor to Sennacherib (see also Ezra
4:2)
Increasing tensions from Babylonia required Assyria’s direct attention.
The increased political freedom of the western city-states is reflected in
the reforms instituted by Josiah
FACT
Jonah and Nahum. During the 700s B.C., the prophet Jonah warned the
people of Nineveh that God was going to destroy their city. The people
repented and were spared from judgment. Over the next century,
however, they returned to their sinful ways. Shortly after the warning
from Nahum, Nineveh was destroyed.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 1:15 Nahum addresses Judah again, as in vv. 12b–13.
Upon the mountains, a messenger brings the good news of Nineveh’s fall
(compare Isa. 52:7). peace. Judah does not have to be afraid of any more
military action and oppression from Assyria. Keep your feasts. These
festivals would remind the people of the Lord’s past acts of deliverance and
the future hope of the coming Messiah. the worthless. That is, the
Assyrians (compare Nah. 1:11).
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:1–13 Focus on Nineveh: The Lord’ s Coming
Judgment. Nahum’s prediction reads like an eyewitness account of
Nineveh being attacked, overrun by the enemy, and plundered.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:1 scatterer. This description of the enemy foretells the
outcome of the attack. Any Ninevites not slaughtered will flee (see 3:17–
18) or will be taken into exile. Ultimately, it is God who “scatters.” has
come up. A technical phrase signifying hostile military action (compare
Judg. 1:1; 1 Sam. 7:7). Man the ramparts. Nineveh is told to get ready for
battle.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:2 God no longer needs the Assyrians to discipline
unfaithful Judah because the LORD is restoring the majesty of Jacob.
Judah’s true majesty was that God had separated them from the nations to
be devoted to him. With them he made his covenants; from them would
come the Messiah (Rom. 9:4–5). plunderers. The Assyrians plundered
Judah (see Nah. 2:13). Their branches are the individual clans, families, or
members of the southern kingdom, compared to a vineyard (compare Isa.
5:1–7).
NAHUM
All that is known about the prophet Nahum is that he came from Elkosh,
probably a town in Judah. Nahum’s name means “comfort.” The message
he received from God—that Nineveh would be destroyed—indeed
brought comfort to his hearers. Following Jonah’s warning, the cruel
Assyrian capital had expressed repentance. That repentance was short-
lived, however, and this time God’s judgment was unavoidable. Although
God had used the Assyrians to punish the wayward southern kingdom, he
would not allow Judah to be annihilated. God’s plan for the Messiah to
come from the line of David could not be defeated. When Nineveh was
destroyed in 612 B.C., the once powerful kingdom of Assyria came to an
end. (Nahum 2:2)
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:3–4 shield . . . red. Perhaps their shields were
permanently stained with the blood of defeated foes from previous battles.
His. . . . he is a reference to the scatterer mentioned in v. 1. The attacking
army was a coalition of Medes and Babylonians, and possibly Scythians.
The streets and squares are those of the suburbs surrounding Nineveh, the
first areas to be overrun by the attacking army.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:5 The attacking army now reaches the wall of Nineveh
proper. He remembers. “He” (see v. 3) may be so eager to be involved in
the attack that he almost forgets to delegate parts of the operation to his
officers. These officers, eager both to join in the attack themselves and to
please their superior(s), practically stumble over one another trying to rush
into the action.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:6 river gates. The Khoser River flowed through
Nineveh. North of the city were dams, most likely with gates to control the
flow of the river. The attacking army could easily have closed the gates,
waited until a large quantity of water collected, and then opened the gates.
The resulting rush of water would have damaged portions of the city’s wall
and internal structures, thus greatly aiding the enemy. The palace melts
away because of the floodwaters.
FACT
The palace mentioned in 2:6 was Sennacherib’s famous “palace without
rival.” Built shortly after his reign began, it had more than 80 rooms,
many open courts, and even fully irrigated hanging gardens. It is
estimated that more than 25 athletic fields could have fit inside the
palace. Yet even this great palace would “melt away” when Nineveh was
destroyed.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:8 like a pool. See note on v. 6. Halt . . . they cry.
Nahum places the reader in Nineveh as the city is attacked by enemy forces.
The reader “sees” the fleeing inhabitants and “hears” some of the Assyrian
commanders crying out, “Halt! Stand and fight,” but none turns back to
do so.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:9 silver . . . gold. Nineveh had taken great wealth
during Assyria’s military victories.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:10 Desolate . . . ruin is a description of Nineveh
emptied of inhabi­ tants and destroyed by the victorious invaders. Hearts
melt . . . pale. The Assyrians previously had been proud of how they
terrorized other peoples. Now they experience such terror themselves.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:11–12 lions. Members of the Assyrian royal house. The
lion was a symbol for kingship (compare Gen. 49:9). The Assyrian kings
exhibited great power in their “devouring” other lands, and even called
themselves lions. none to disturb. During the time of Assyrian strength, no
other nation dared to attack Nineveh. enough . . . prey . . . torn flesh. That
is, the vast amounts of goods taken by the Assyrians in their conquest of
numerous lands.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 2:13 Nineveh will fall because this is the will of the Lord.
In vv. 1 and 13 Nineveh is addressed (“you,” “your”), and both verses
express the thought “against you.” LORD of hosts. See note on Mic. 4:4.
burn your chariots. A striking contrast to the conquering army’s swift
chariots (Nah. 2:3–4). sword shall devour. The destructive lions (vv. 11–
12) shall now be conquered by the enemy.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:1–19 Again, Focus on Nineveh: More concerning the
Lord’ s Coming Judgment. This last major section of the book repeats most
of the themes of the previous section (2:1–13). However, it does not
mention the plundering of Nineveh (compare 2:9), and it adds the
comparison of Nineveh’s downfall to the destruction of Thebes (3:8–11).
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:1 bloody. The Assyrians were well known for their
viciousness.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:4 This verse uses figurative language to explain the
reasons for Nineveh’s destruction. graceful . . . deadly charms. Nineveh,
with its power and wealth, exerted a corrupting influence throughout the
Near East (compare 2 Kings 16:18). betrays. The Assyrian leaders did not
hesitate to use treachery and deceit to achieve their aims (see Nah. 3:1).
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:5 Behold, I am against you. Compare 2:13; the
repetition emphasizes the certainty of Nineveh’s doom.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:7 who will grieve for her? The answer to the rhetorical
question is that no one will grieve for or comfort Nineveh. People will
shrink back or flee in horror at the sight of what will happen to Nineveh.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:8–11 To those who think it is impossible that Nineveh
would fall, Nahum reminds them of what had recently happened to the
mighty city of Thebes, in Egypt (see Introduction: Author and Date).
FACT
As safe as Thebes? The people of Nineveh thought no one could destroy
their city. Yet they themselves had destroyed the Egyptian city of Thebes,
which was also considered indestructible. Nahum reminded the Ninevites
of this (3:8–11) and warned them that it was now their turn to see their
great city destroyed.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:8 Are you better than Thebes? Nineveh was no more
secure than Thebes. Nile . . . water around her. This mighty river and its
tributaries surrounded most of Thebes, forming a natural wall for the city.
This was part of the city’s strong defense system. Rampart a sea is a poetic
reference to the Nile (compare Isa. 19:5–6), which was about half a mile
(0.8 km) wide at Thebes. Nineveh had no such protection.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:9 Cush was the region just south of Egypt. Egypt
refers to military aid coming from northern Egypt. Put may have been on
the north African coastline. While Thebes could count on military
assistance from these different areas, Assyria could not rely on help from
any region.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:10 Despite its strategic advantages, Thebes was
conquered by the Assyrians.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:11 This verse directly applies the lesson of vv. 8–10:
“Nineveh, you can expect the same!” Just as a drunken man cannot defend
himself against an attacker, so Nineveh will not be able to turn back its
enemies.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:12–13 Nineveh’s surrounding fortresses will be the
first to be taken by the advancing enemy army. The gates of Assyria will be
wide open to the enemies since the fortresses that guarded those entrances
have been destroyed. The troops, that is, the soldiers within Nineveh, will
be filled with fear, so that they cannot act as men. fire. See 2:13; 3:15.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:14 As the enemy draws close, Nahum tells the city to
get ready for the attack (see 2:1). However, any preparations they make will
be useless. Draw water. The Ninevites can assume that the enemy will shut
off the city’s water supply by closing the river gates (see note on 2:6). forts.
The fortresses at the walls and within the city would be strengthened or
repaired with clay bricks and mortar.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:15 No matter how well supplied and fortified Nineveh
is, there the inhabitants will die. fire. Archaeologists have found evidence
of a devastating fire at Nineveh. sword. Compare 2:13. Multiply . . . locust
. . . grasshopper. Nahum sarcastically tells the Ninevites, in preparation for
the attack, to multiply themselves greatly and thus increase their strength.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:16 You increased your merchants. When Nineveh
was the proud capital of a vast empire, her merchants brought enormous
wealth to the city. Now, however, these merchants, and the huge treasure in
Nineveh, will do the city no good. The locust . . . flies away. Compare v.
15. The enemy, having destroyed all that there was in Nineveh, will quickly
leave.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:17 Like swarms of grasshoppers or locusts that
quickly fly away and disappear, some of the leading men of Nineveh will
flee when the enemy takes the city.
NAHUM—NOTE ON 3:18–19 king of Assyria. See 1:11. Nahum, looking at
Nineveh’s wreckage, addresses its monarchy with sarcastic language. Many
of Nineveh’s shepherds (leaders and officials) and nobles are dead. Many
of the people are scattered. The wound Assyria has received is grievous
and marks the end of the empire. unceasing evil. Assyrian emperors had
continually caused terror and suffering. Nahum prophesies that the Assyrian
monarchy, and Nineveh, will experience the same disasters that it inflicted
on other peoples of the Near East.
H a b a k k u k
(return to table of contents)
Habakkuk 1 • Habakkuk 2 • Habakkuk 3
Introduction to Habakkuk
Timeline
Author and Date
Theme and Overview
Key Themes
Outline
The Near East at the Time of Habakkuk
Global Message of Habakkuk
Trusting the Lord
Habakkuk in Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Habakkuk
The Global Message of Habakkuk for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Habakkuk
Introduction to Habakkuk
Timeline
Author and Date
Habakkuk is unusual as a prophetic book. It never addresses the people of
Judah directly. Rather it is a dialogue between the prophet and God. The
prophet Habakkuk was probably a contemporary of Zephaniah and Jeremiah,
and possibly even of Ezekiel and Daniel. He probably prophesied no later than
the end of Josiah’s reign (640–609 B.C.).
Theme and Overview
The first two chapters are organized around Habakkuk’s questions and the
Lord’s replies. Habakkuk saw Judah’s rapid moral and spiritual decline, and
this deeply troubled him. Yet God’s response puzzled him even more. How
could a good and just God use a more wicked nation (Babylon) to punish a less
wicked one (Judah)? God makes it clear that both nations are to be judged and
appropriately punished for their sin. Although Habakkuk may not fully
understand, he has learned to rely totally on God’s wisdom and justice. He
knows God can resolve issues in ways he could never have imagined. This God
is certainly worthy of Habakkuk’s praise and worship, which is how the book
ends.
Many of the righteous in Judah would have agreed with Habakkuk’s words.
They wondered what God was doing and struggled with the same issues as
Habakkuk. God’s words reassured them that he was in control and would deal
appropriately with the nations.
Key Themes
1. God is just and merciful, even though his people may not always
understand his ways (2:4).
2. Wickedness will eventually be punished, and the righteous will ultimately
see God’s justice (2:5–20).
3. God uses some wicked nations to punish other wicked nations, but
ultimately God will judge all nations (1:6; 2:5–20).
4. The key phrase “the righteous shall live by his faith” (2:4) summarizes
God’s plan for his people. It is quoted three times in the NT (Rom. 1:17;
Gal. 3:11; Heb. 10:38). Each time a different aspect of the phrase’s
meaning is highlighted.
Outline
I. Superscription (1:1)
II. First Cycle (1:2–11)
A. Habakkuk’s lament (1:2–4)
B. God’s response (1:5–11)
III. Second Cycle (1:12–2:20)
A. Habakkuk’s lament (1:12–2:1)
B. God’s response (2:2–20)
IV . Habakkuk’s Prayer (3:1–19)
The Near East at the Time of Habakkuk
c. 620 B.C.
Though the exact date of the prophecies of Habakkuk is difficult to
determine, it is likely that he prophesied a short time before the Babylonian
invasions of Judah, which began in 605 B.C. During this time the Assyrian
Empire was in decline, and the Babylonians were rising to replace them as the
dominant power in the Near East.
The Global Message of Habakkuk
Trusting the Lord
Trust the Lord, no matter what. That is Habakkuk’s message for God’s
people around the world today. Believers can, and must, trust in God no
matter how tumultuous outward circumstances may become.
Habakkuk is unique in that the prophet is not speaking to God’s people
but rather to God himself. Habakkuk is perplexed because God is planning
to use Babylon to punish his own people, Judah, even though Babylon is far
more wicked than Judah. The three chapters of this prophecy show
Habakkuk wrestling with God in anguish, but ultimately learning to trust in
the Lord no matter what.
Down through history and around the world, this has been the test to
which God’s children are called. Whatever political circumstances or
economic hardships or religious persecution they are experiencing, will
they trust him? Will they gladly rely on God for all that they need to nourish
and sustain them as they await their inheritance of the world itself (Matt.
25:34; 1 Cor. 3:21–23).
Habakkuk in Redemptive History
Trust in self. Though it is difficult to know when Habakkuk was written, it
was clearly at a time when Judah was at a moral low point, possibly during
the reign of the extremely wicked kings Manasseh or Amon. Judah had
sunk so low that the people were worshiping Baal, offering their children in
sacrifice to the pagan god Molech, dedicating horses to the sun god, and
neglecting the care of the temple.
The sin of Judah 2,600 years ago traces all the way back to the fall of
Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden. Since that critical moment, all of
humanity has been plagued with a tendency toward self-centeredness and
pride. One way this manifests itself is in unhealthy self-trust and self-
reliance—depending on our own abilities or cleverness or resources for a
stable existence. This was Judah’s sin.
Trust in Christ. Yet Judah’s sin reaches not only backward to Eden but
also forward to our own day, and it is ultimately healed only in Christ. Only
through Christ can the mercy of God toward his people and his justice
toward their sinful self-trust be equally upheld. Beholding Christ and his
work on the cross, we are freed by the Holy Spirit from self-trust as we
learn to trust in Christ. As the New Testament puts it, drawing on
Habakkuk, “The righteous shall live by faith” (Rom. 1:17; Hab. 2:4;
compare Gal. 3:11; Heb. 10:38).
As we consider the book of Habakkuk in global redemptive history, we
remember God’s unchanging commitment to preserve his people. He will
sustain and purify his people at all costs, yet he does this at times in ways
that are deeply mysterious to them. Yet even when it is through strange
events that his people are purged, they are called to put their faith
wholeheartedly in him, no matter what.
Universal Themes in Habakkuk
Confidence in the Lord. This is the key theme of Habakkuk, and it is a
universal need for God’s people around the world and down through
history. God can and must be trusted at all costs. This has been proven to us
supremely in Christ. Jesus Christ gave up everything in heaven to come to
earth and die for sinners so that we sinners, having been forgiven, can give
up everything on earth when so required, knowing that we will one day be
in heaven with him. God is the maker of heaven and earth, the upholder and
sustainer of all things. He is sovereign, wise, and abundant in mercy—he
can be trusted.
God will bring all wickedness to account. Judah had become deeply
wicked, and God brought Babylon to punish them. Yet Babylon too was
desperately wicked—in Habakkuk’s eyes, even more wicked than Judah
(Hab. 1:13). Therefore God would also bring Babylon to account, as well as
all other nations of the earth (3:12). God’s justice will ultimately be
universally distributed in perfect righteousness and fairness. No one will get
what is not deserved. All who have walked uprightly will be treated
accordingly. And all who have walked in wickedness, no matter how hidden
from human eyes, will be judged accordingly (1 Cor. 4:5).
The global glory of God. Habakkuk’s prophecy presents believers with a
picture of a majestic God who in his dealings with us transcends ethnic,
racial, and economic differences. Responding to Habakkuk’s astonishment
that he would use the Babylonians to punish Judah, the Lord proclaims that
“the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD as the
waters cover the sea” (Hab. 2:14). This vision of what will one day be true
of all the earth shows us how we should conduct ourselves in the meantime:
“But the LORD is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence before
him” (2:20). Recalling God’s great deliverance of Israel from Egypt (3:3,
15), Habakkuk reflects on how “his splendor covered the heavens, and the
earth was full of his praise” (3:3) as God “shook the nations” (3:6). In all of
this we see the worldwide dimensions of God’s glory, his resplendent
magnificence as he goes into action.
The Global Message of Habakkuk for Today
It is often difficult to see the hand of God in a fallen world. We become
quickly perplexed and doubtful of his faithfulness and care in light of
natural disasters, poor stewardship of the earth’s resources, political
corruption, rejection of the gospel, hostility toward followers of Christ,
hunger, economic instability, and a thousand other frustrations and
disappointments.
Yet even when all outward evidence points to the contrary, the church is
called to trust in the Lord. This trust is based not on what we see but on who
God is—the God who will “in wrath remember mercy” (Hab. 3:2). God’s
character is supremely revealed in Jesus Christ, the final “anointed” one
(3:13), in whom divine wrath and divine mercy meet. Because of Christ’s
saving work on the cross, God calls all people from every tribe and nation
to place their trust in him, for “the righteous shall live by his faith” (2:4).
As believers around the globe meditate on Habakkuk’s prophecy, may we
all join together in affirming,
Though the fig tree should not blossom,
nor fruit be on the vines,
the produce of the olive fail
and the fields yield no food,
the flock be cut off from the fold
and there be no herd in the stalls,
yet I will rejoice in the LORD;
I will take joy in the God of my salvation. (Hab. 3:17–18)