NEHEMIAH 9 [†]Now on the twenty-fourth day of v this month the people of
Israel were assembled w with fasting x and in sackcloth, y and with earth on
their heads. 2[†] z And the Israelites [1] separated themselves from all
foreigners and stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their
fathers. 3
a And they stood up in their place and read from the Book of the
Law of the LORD their God for a quarter of the day; for another quarter of it
they made confession and worshiped the LORD their God. 4On the stairs of
the Levites stood b Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah,
Bani, and Chenani; and they cried with a loud voice to the LORD their God.
5Then the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah,
Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, “Stand up and bless the LORD your God
from everlasting to everlasting. c Blessed be your glorious name, which is
exalted above all blessing and praise.
6[†] [2] d “You are the LORD, you alone. e You have made heaven, f the
heaven of heavens, g with all their host, e the earth and all that is on it, the
seas and all that is in them; h and you preserve all of them; and the host of
heaven worships you. 7[†]You are the LORD, the God i who chose Abram
and brought him out of j Ur of the Chaldeans k and gave him the name
Abraham. 8
l You found his heart faithful before you, m and made with him
the covenant to give to his offspring n the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite,
the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Jebusite, and the Girgashite. o And you have
kept your promise, for you are righteous.
9[†] p “And you saw the affliction of our fathers in Egypt and heard q their
cry at the Red Sea, 10 r and performed signs and wonders against Pharaoh
and all his servants and all the people of his land, for you knew that s they
acted arrogantly against our fathers. And t you made a name for yourself, as
it is to this day.
11 u And you divided the sea before them, so that they went
through the midst of the sea on dry land, and you cast their pursuers into the
depths, v as a stone into mighty waters. 12[†]By w a pillar of cloud you led
them in the day, and by a pillar of fire in the night to light for them the way
in which they should go. 13[†] x You came down on Mount Sinai y and spoke
with them from heaven and gave them z right rules and true laws, good
statutes and commandments, 14
a and you made known to them your holy
Sabbath and commanded them commandments and statutes and a law by
Moses your servant. 15[†] b You gave them bread from heaven for their
hunger and c brought water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and you
d told them to go in to possess the land that you had sworn to give them.
16[†]“But they and our fathers e acted presumptuously and stiffened their
neck and did not obey your commandments. 17They refused to obey f and
were not mindful of the wonders that you performed among them, but they
stiffened their neck and appointed a leader to return to their slavery in
Egypt. But you are a God ready to forgive, g gracious and merciful, slow to
anger and abounding in steadfast love, and did not forsake them. 18Even
h when they had made for themselves a golden [3] calf and said, ‘This is
your God who brought you up out of Egypt,’ i and had committed great
blasphemies, 19you j in your great mercies did not forsake them in the
wilderness. k The pillar of cloud to lead them in the way did not depart from
them by day, k nor the pillar of fire by night to light for them the way by
which they should go. 20 l You gave your good Spirit to instruct them m and
did not withhold your manna from their mouth and gave them water for
their thirst. 21[†] n Forty years you sustained them in the wilderness, and
they lacked nothing. Their clothes did not wear out and their feet did not
swell.
22“And you gave them kingdoms and peoples and allotted to them every
corner. o So they took possession of the land of Sihon king of Heshbon
p and the land of Og king of Bashan. 23[†]You multiplied their children q as
the stars of heaven, and you brought them into the land that you had told
their fathers to enter and possess. 24 r So the descendants went in and
possessed the land, s and you subdued before them the inhabitants of the
land, the Canaanites, and gave them into their hand, with their kings and the
peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would. 25And they
captured t fortified cities and u a rich land, and took possession of v houses
full of all good things, cisterns already hewn, vineyards, olive orchards and
fruit trees in abundance. So they ate and were filled w and became fat and
delighted themselves in x your great goodness.
26[†] y “Nevertheless, they were disobedient and rebelled against you
z and cast your law behind their back a and killed your prophets, who b had
warned them in order to turn them back to you, c and they committed great
blasphemies. 27 d Therefore you gave them into the hand of their enemies,
who made them suffer. e And in the time of their suffering they cried out to
you and you heard them from heaven, and according to your great mercies
you gave them f saviors who saved them from the hand of their enemies.
28 g But after they had rest they did evil again before you, and you
abandoned them to the hand of their enemies, so that they had dominion
over them. Yet when they turned and cried to you, you heard from heaven,
h and many times you delivered them according to your mercies. 29[†] b And
you warned them in order to turn them back to your law. Yet i they acted
presumptuously and did not obey your commandments, but sinned against
your rules, j which if a person does them, he shall live by them, k and they
turned a stubborn shoulder l and stiffened their neck and would not obey.
30[†]Many years m you bore with them n and warned them o by your Spirit
through your prophets. p Yet they would not give ear. q Therefore you gave
them into the hand of the peoples of the lands. 31Nevertheless, r in your
great mercies s you did not make an end of them or forsake them, t for you
are a gracious and merciful God.
32[†]“Now, therefore, our God, u the great, the mighty, and the awesome
God, who keeps covenant and steadfast love, let not all the hardship seem
little to you that has come upon us, upon our kings, our princes, our priests,
our prophets, our fathers, and all your people, v since the time of the kings
of Assyria until this day.
33 w Yet you have been righteous in all that has
come upon us, for you have dealt faithfully x and we have acted wickedly.
34Our kings, our princes, our priests, and our fathers have not kept your law
or paid attention to your commandments and your warnings that you gave
them. 35Even in their own kingdom, y and amid your great goodness that
you gave them, and in the large and y rich land that you set before them,
z they did not serve you or turn from their wicked works. 36[†]Behold, a we
are slaves this day; in the land that you gave to our fathers to enjoy its fruit
and its good gifts, behold, we are slaves. 37 b And its rich yield goes to the
kings whom you have set over us because of our sins. They rule over our
bodies and over our livestock as they please, and we are in great distress.
38 [4] “Because of all this c we make a firm covenant in writing; on d the
sealed document are the names of [5] our princes, our Levites, and our
priests.
The People Who Sealed the Covenant