NEHEMIAH 13 [†]On that day r they read from the Book of Moses in the
hearing of the people. And in it was found written s that no Ammonite or
Moabite should ever enter the assembly of God, 2for they did not meet the
people of Israel with bread and water, but hired Balaam against them to
curse them—yet our God turned the curse into a blessing. 3As soon as the
people heard the law, t they separated from Israel all u those of foreign
descent.
4[†]Now before this, v Eliashib the priest, who w was appointed over the
chambers of the house of our God, and who was related to x Tobiah,
5prepared for Tobiah a large chamber where they had previously put the
grain offering, the frankincense, the vessels, and the tithes of grain, wine,
and oil, y which were given by commandment to the Levites, singers, and
gatekeepers, and the contributions for the priests. 6[†]While this was taking
place, I was not in Jerusalem, for z in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes
a king of Babylon I went to the king. And after some time I asked leave of
the king 7and came to Jerusalem, and I then discovered the evil that Eliashib
had done for Tobiah, b preparing for him a chamber in the courts of the
house of God. 8And I was very angry, and I threw all the household
furniture of Tobiah out of the chamber.
9[†]Then I gave orders, and they
c cleansed the chambers, and I brought back there the vessels of the house
of God, with the grain offering and the frankincense.
10[†]I also found out that d the portions of the Levites had not been given
to them, so that the Levites and the singers, who did the work, had fled each
e to his field. 11
f So I confronted the officials and said, g “Why is the house
of God forsaken?” And I gathered them together and set them in their
stations. 12Then all Judah brought h the tithe of the grain, wine, and oil into
the storehouses. 13And i I appointed as treasurers over the storehouses
Shelemiah the priest, Zadok the scribe, and Pedaiah of the Levites, and as
their assistant Hanan the son of Zaccur, son of Mattaniah, j for they were
considered reliable, and their duty was to distribute to their brothers.
14 k Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and do not wipe out my
good deeds that I have done for the house of my God and for his service.
15[†]In those days I saw in Judah people treading winepresses l on the
Sabbath, and bringing in heaps of grain and loading them on donkeys, and
also wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of loads, m which they brought into
Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. And n I warned them on the day when they
sold food. 16[†]Tyrians also, who lived in the city, brought in fish and all
kinds of goods and sold them on the Sabbath to the people of Judah, in
Jerusalem itself! 17 o Then I confronted the nobles of Judah and said to
them, “What is this evil thing that you are doing, p profaning the Sabbath
day? 18[†] q Did not your fathers act in this way, and did not our God bring
all this disaster [1] on us and on this city? Now you are bringing more wrath
on Israel by profaning the Sabbath.”
19[†]As soon as it r began to grow dark at the gates of Jerusalem before
the Sabbath, I commanded that the doors should be shut and gave orders
that they should not be opened until after the Sabbath. And I stationed some
of my servants at the gates, that no load might be brought in on the Sabbath
day.
20Then the merchants and sellers of all kinds of wares lodged outside
Jerusalem once or twice. 21 s But I warned them and said to them, “Why do
you lodge outside the wall? If you do so again, I will lay hands on you.”
From that time on they did not come on the Sabbath. 22[†]Then I
commanded the Levites t that they should purify themselves and come and
guard the gates, to keep the Sabbath day holy. u Remember this also in my
favor, O my God, and spare me according to the greatness of your steadfast
love.
23[†]In those days also I saw the Jews v who had married women w of
Ashdod, x Ammon, and x Moab. 24And half of their children spoke the
language of Ashdod, and they could not speak the language of Judah, but
only the language of each people. 25[†] o And I confronted them and cursed
them and beat some of them and pulled out their hair. y And I made them
take an oath in the name of God, saying, “You shall not give your daughters
to their sons, or take their daughters for your sons or for yourselves. 26 z Did
not Solomon king of Israel sin on account of such women? a Among the
many nations there was no king like him, and he was b beloved by his God,
and God made him king over all Israel. Nevertheless, foreign women made
even him to sin. 27Shall we then listen to you and do all this great evil and
c act treacherously against our God by marrying foreign women?”
28And one of the sons of d Jehoiada, the son of e Eliashib the high priest,
was the son-in-law of f Sanballat the Horonite. Therefore I chased him from
me. 29[†] g Remember them, O my God, because they have desecrated the
priesthood h and the covenant of the priesthood and the Levites.
30[†] i Thus I cleansed them from everything foreign, and I established the
duties of the priests and Levites, each in his work; 31and I provided j for the
wood offering k at appointed times, and for the firstfruits.
l Remember me, O my God, for good.
Study Notes for Nehemiah
1:1–2:20 Nehemiah Returns to Jerusalem to Rebuild Its Walls. This section
recounts Nehemiah’s vision for and first efforts in rebuilding Jerusalem. He
learns of Jerusalem’s decaying condition (1:1–11), gains permission to
rebuild the city, inspects its walls (2:1–16), and endures the first wave of
opposition (2:17–20).
1:1–11 Nehemiah Learns of Jerusalem’ s Dilapidation. Nehemiah hears of the
distress of Jerusalem and Judah (vv. 1–3) and prays for God’s favor toward
them (vv. 4–11).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:1 Nehemiah means “Yahweh has comforted.” The
twentieth year is that of Artaxerxes’ reign, 445 B.C., 13 years after Ezra’s
arrival in Jerusalem (Ezra 7:7). Chislev is the ninth month
(November/December), in the winter. Susa the citadel was a winter residence
of the king.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:2–3 Hanani, one of my brothers. See also 7:2. came
with certain men. It is not known whether these men were residents of
Jerusalem or of Persia. The nature of their mission is also unknown. the Jews
who escaped, who had survived the exile. This, along with the remnant,
refers to the returned exiles living in Jerusalem and Judah (see note on Ezra
9:8).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:4 wept and mourned. Compare Ezra 9:4–5; 10:1. God
of heaven was a way of referring to God in international contexts (see Ezra
1:2; 5:12).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:5 O LORD God of heaven. This combination of names
means that the God of Israel (Ex. 3:13–15) is the only God. keeps covenant
and steadfast love with those who love him and keep his commandments.
See Deut. 7:9. Steadfast love is God’s faithfulness to Israel in his covenant with
them, and it requires Israel’s love in return (see also Deut. 6:5).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:6 Nehemiah’s use of “servant” for himself (your
servant) and Israel (your servants) is significant since he is also a servant of
King Artaxerxes.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:7 the commandments, the statutes, and the rules.
See note on Ezra 7:10.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:9 if you return to me. Nehemiah appeals to God’s
promise that, if Israel repented, he would restore them to the land and
prosperity (Lev. 26:40–42; Deut. 4:29–31; 30:1–6). While many of God’s
people have returned from exile, the land is not yet secure. The place that I
have chosen was primarily where the Lord’s sanctuary would be, that is,
Jerusalem (2 Kings 21:4). to make my name dwell there. The Lord claimed
the place as his own, against the claims of other gods or rulers.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:10 Redeemed by your great power and by your
strong hand refers to the deliverance of Israel from Egypt (Exodus 7–15;
compare Deut. 4:34).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 1:11 fear your name. On “fearing” God, see note on
Prov. 1:7 and other verses mentioned there. God’s “name” here represents
God’s character and all that he is. mercy in the sight of this man (Artaxerxes).
Nehemiah knows that God can move powerful people to act in favor of his
people (see Ezra 6:22). But he may also know that Artaxerxes has already
decreed that work on rebuilding Jerusalem should stop (see Ezra 4:23; Neh.
1:2–3). The position of cupbearer to the king was a high office providing
regular access to the king.
FACT
Cupbearer to the king may sound like a lowly position, but it was actually
considered a high office. The cupbearer’s job was to taste any wine brought
to the king, in case it was poisoned. The king had to trust his cupbearer with
his very life. Because of their trusted position, many cupbearers, such as
Nehemiah (1:11), were able to exert political influence in the royal court.
2:1–16 Nehemiah Gains Permission to Return and Inspects Jerusalem’ s Walls.
Nehemiah is allowed to go to Jerusalem (vv. 1–8). He surveys the walls,
finding them in very poor condition (vv. 9–16).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:2 Nehemiah did not show his grief during the four
months since 1:1, perhaps because it was part of his duty to be positive and
encouraging. Nehemiah was very much afraid because he was about to say
something that the king might take as disloyalty.
Chronology of Nehemiah
Event Month/Day Year Reference
Hanani brings Nehemiah a report from Jerusalem (20th year of Artaxerxes I) 445–444 B.C. 1:1
Nehemiah before King Artaxerxes 1 445 2:1
Nehemiah arrives to inspect Jerusalem walls 445 2:11
Wall is finished 6/25 445 6:15
People of Israel gather 7 445 7:73–8:1
People of Israel celebrate Feast of Booths 7/15–22 445 8:14
People of Israel fast and confess sins 7/24 445 9:1
Nehemiah returns to Susa (32nd year of Artaxerxes I) 433 5:14; 13:6
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:3 Let the king live forever! Nehemiah first shows his
loyalty and explains the reason for his grief, without yet making his request.
my fathers’ graves. He may think that this way of speaking about Jerusalem
will make the king sympathetic.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:4–6 The king then invites a request. So I prayed.
Nehemiah had already prayed a great deal, of course (see 1:4), but here he
prays again before answering the king. When Nehemiah makes his request, the
king agrees readily. He demands only that Nehemiah commit to a date when he
will return to Susa.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:7–8 Nehemiah is encouraged by the king’s positive
response. He now asks for specific authority to show letters to the governors
of the province Beyond the River. This included the very people who had
previously persuaded Artaxerxes to stop the rebuilding of the city (Ezra 4:7–9).
Nehemiah goes further, requesting timber from the king’s forest (location
unknown). The name Asaph suggests that he was a Jewish royal official. The
fortress of the temple was a special defense of the temple, probably on the
northern, most vulnerable side. The temple fortress may have included the
towers mentioned in Neh. 3:1. The wood for the wall of the city would have
been mainly for the gates.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:9 Nehemiah’s imperial authority is shown by the
officers and horsemen sent with him.
FACT
The fortress of the temple (2:8) provided extra defense for the temple area,
since this section of Jerusalem was very vulnerable to attack. Many other
governors of Jerusalem after Nehemiah built fortresses here, including
Herod the Great, whose famous Antonia Fortress can be visited today.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:10 Sanballat the Horonite was later the governor of
Samaria, and he may have been so at this time. Tobiah is a Jewish name, yet as
an Ammonite his people are one of Israel’s historic enemies (2 Sam. 10:1–14).
Servant here may mean government official.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:11–12 three days. Compare Ezra 8:32. in the night.
Nehemiah aims to keep his mission secret from potential enemies and his own
people till his plans are fully formed (see also Neh. 2:16).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:13–15 Nehemiah surveys the walls mainly on the
southern and eastern sides—the city of David and the Kidron Valley. The
Valley Gate was probably on the southwestern side of the city of David, and
the Dung Gate, leading to the city dump, at its southern tip. The Dragon
Spring, Fountain Gate, and King’s Pool are unidentified, but were no doubt
on the east where the Kidron Valley’s water sources were. The valley is the
Kidron Valley.
2:17–20 First Signs of Opposition. Nehemiah now exhorts his countrymen.
They are willing to work, but opposition quickly emerges, as vv. 9–10 have
already hinted.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:18 the hand of my God. Compare 1:10; 2:8; Ezra 7:6,
28; 8:18. God was working to bless his people.
NEHEMIAH
As a Jewish captive in Babylon, Nehemiah held the distinguished position of
cupbearer to King Artaxerxes. He was devastated to hear that the Jews who
had returned to Jerusalem were in “great trouble and shame” (1:3). He
expressed his concern to the king, and the king allowed him to return to
Jerusalem to rebuild the city’s walls. Many of the non-Jewish people in
Judah opposed the rebuilding effort, and the returned exiles soon became
disheartened. Nehemiah encouraged the men, saying, “Do not be afraid of
them. Remember the Lord, who is great and awesome, and fight for your
brothers, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your homes” (4:14).
Under his leadership, the walls were rebuilt despite the difficult
circumstances. As governor of Judah, Nehemiah was used mightily by God
to bring the Jews back into a life of covenant faithfulness. (Nehemiah 2:17–
18)
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:19 Opponents claim that the people are rebelling
against the king. Artaxerxes had previously believed this extremely serious
charge (Ezra 4:12–13, 19–22).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 2:20 Nehemiah knows the king is on his side, but
recognizes the God of heaven as his true authority. but you have no portion
or right or claim in Jerusalem. He is convinced that they are opposing God’s
work.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:1–7:4 The Wall Is Built, Despite Difficulties. The
people of Judah build and repair the walls, despite the efforts to stop them.
Excavations in Jerusalem have uncovered remains of Nehemiah’s wall, which
apparently incorporated walls from previous times.
Jerusalem in the Time of Nehemiah (c. 444–420? B.C.)
Jerusalem was destroyed by the Babylonians in 586 B.C. Upon their return from exile in 536 B.C., the
Jews, under the leadership of Zerubbabel and Jeshua, first restored the altar and then laid the foundation
of the temple. Twenty years later, in 516 B.C., the temple was rebuilt. This time period is referred to as the
Second Temple period.
Later on, and under very difficult circumstances, Nehemiah restored the city wall. This is described in
great detail in ch. 3. There is ample archaeological evidence, both positive and negative, to show that
only the Eastern Hill of Jerusalem was fortified at that time and that the eastern wall of the city was built
higher up the slope than the previous wall, so that the city was smaller than that of Solomon.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
3:1–32 The People Work Systematically on the Walls. The building work is
described, and the workers are named, section by section. The people
responded to Nehemiah’s challenge and believed that God would give them
success.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:1–2 Eliashib the high priest was the grandson of
Jeshua, the priest in Zerubbabel’s time (see 12:10; Ezra 5:2). with his
brothers. The work was assigned to groups mainly by family and sometimes
according to where they lived. The work began and ended at the Sheep Gate,
on the northern side of the temple. Tower. See note on Neh. 2:7–8.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:5 the Tekoites . . . their nobles. The leading people of
Tekoa, not far south of Jerusalem, may have resented Nehemiah’s leadership.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:7 Mizpah was an important administrative center after
Jerusalem’s fall (Jer. 41:1).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:8 goldsmiths . . . perfumers. Many workers were
organized in groups by their trade.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:9 ruler of half the district of Jerusalem. Similar
expressions occur six times in vv. 12–18. They may refer to an administrative
system that divided the province into six sections.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:13–15 Valley Gate . . . Dung Gate. See note on 2:13–
15. a thousand cubits. About 500 yards (457 m). Fountain Gate. See note on
2:13–15. city of David. The part of the city originally occupied by David,
south of what is now the Temple Mount.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:16 After him describes each successive group of
builders. Nehemiah the son of Azbuk is a different Nehemiah, of course.
ruler of half the district. See note on v. 9.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:26 temple servants. See note on Ezra 2:43–54. Ophel
was the whole southeastern hill. The Water Gate, in the old wall, probably
opened onto the Gihon Spring, the main water source outside the city wall.
FACT
What was the Ophel? The Ophel (3:26) was a hill in Jerusalem between the
Kidron and Central Valleys. It was northeast of the older City of David and
just south of the Temple Mount. The oldest part of Jerusalem was built long
before David captured the city from the Jebusites.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:29 The East Gate may have been a gate into the temple
rather than a gate in the wall.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 3:32 Sheep Gate. See note on vv. 1–2.
4:1–23 Opposition Intensifies, but the People Continue Watchfully. While the
building continues, Sanballat and his allies resort to direct action in order to
stop it, but their plot is foiled.
FACT
Why did so many local people oppose Nehemiah? After the exile, people
who had been living in Judah for over a hundred years saw it as belonging to
them and not to the returning Jews. Nehemiah had the blessing of King
Artaxerxes to rebuild the walls, but the king was in Persia, more than 1,100
miles (1,770 km) away. This made Nehemiah’s enemies bolder in their
opposition to him.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:1–2 Sanballat (see 2:9–10) mocks the work, no doubt
to encourage his brothers (or allies) to join him in resisting. army of Samaria.
It is not clear whether Sanballat really had authority to command an army.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:6 half its height. At this point, the project could still be
stopped.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:7–8 It is hard to imagine that the Nehemiah’s
opponents could have been successful, since his work had been authorized by
the Persian king. Still, they were probably intimidating, since the Persian
capital was about 1,100 miles (1,770 km) away, a journey of some 55 days.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:12 Friends and families of people who have come from
the villages to work on the walls try to persuade them to come home because of
the danger.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:15 God had frustrated their plan. The immediate
threat is apparently over, but the work continues with half the people’s
attention given to defense.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:16–17 each labored on the work with one hand and
held his weapon with the other. Though Nehemiah and the people prayed and
trusted God for protection (see vv. 4, 9, 14, 20), they also stayed ready to
defend themselves. God often accomplishes his purposes by ordinary human
means.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:20 With the people spread out, they were vulnerable at
every point (v. 19). Nehemiah addresses this problem with his plan to let the
sound of the trumpet be heard—a well-established call to battle. Our God
will fight for us. Compare Ex. 14:14; Deut. 1:30.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 4:21–23 They worked on the wall in the day and guarded
the city at night. By not taking off their clothes, they remained ready to engage
the enemy.
5:1–19 Nehemiah Deals with Injustices in the Community; Nehemiah’ s
Personal Contribution to the Project. Nehemiah takes measures to end the
exploitation of the weak in the community by its powerful members, who are
ignoring God’s commandments.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:1 The people are the ordinary citizens, not nobles or
officials (see v. 7). And of their wives adds to the picture of families made
desperate by hunger. Jewish brothers shows the strong bond among all
Israelites. By Mosaic law, no Israelite should permanently enslave or take
advantage of another (Deut. 15:1–15).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:2–3 let us get grain. Perhaps the men who are working
full time on the building project cannot do their usual work to feed their
families. Some of them were mortgaging their fields and houses to pay the
heavy tax charged by the Persians.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:5 forcing our sons and our daughters to be slaves.
Temporary debt-slavery (but not permanent chattel-slavery) was permitted in
Mosaic law among Israelites. It was often the only way a debt could be paid
(see Deut. 15:12).
FACT
The returned exiles would sometimes mortgage their property (5:3) to raise
money for the heavy taxes imposed on them. This mortgaging would have
involved temporarily forfeiting the use of one’s property and any fruit it
produced to wealthier people who could afford to pay the taxes. The Mosaic
law forbade such practices, and Nehemiah was quick to oppose it.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:7 The nobles and the officials within the Jewish
community are accused of oppressing their own people. Oppression of the
weak by the strong had been one of the reasons for the exile (see Isa. 5:7–10;
Amos 2:6–8). exacting interest. Property might be taken in pledge, pending
repayment of a loan. Taking interest from a fellow Israelite who borrowed out
of need was forbidden (Deut. 23:19–20).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:8 sold . . . sell . . . sold. In his anger, Nehemiah points
out the irony of the Jews being redeemed from exile only to be sold into
slavery by their own brothers.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:9 fear of our God. See note on 1:11. taunts. See 4:1–
4.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:10 Let us. Nehemiah suggests that he himself has been
guilty of this injustice.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:11–12 Return . . . their fields. This commands
returning the illegitimately seized interest, but it also seems to order a return of
the items pledged to secure the loans. This goes beyond plans for debt-release
(Deut. 15:1–11) or jubilee (Leviticus 25), since it is to be done without delay.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:13 shook out the fold. A symbolic action matching the
words of the curse that follow. So may God shake out. This type of curse-
formula was a way of compelling people to do something. By saying Amen,
the whole assembly agreed to the terms of Nehemiah’s curse.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:14 governor. This is the first indication that Nehemiah
held this official post in the province of Yehud (Judea), within the larger
province of Beyond the River. twentieth . . . to the thirty-second year. 445 to
433 B.C. Nehemiah returned to Susa in 433, and then returned to Jerusalem
sometime between 433 and 423. food allowance of the governor. Governors
could raise taxes for their own use, but Nehemiah has not done so.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:15 former governors. Nehemiah’s predecessors had
used the people to enrich themselves and their servants.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:16 I also persevered. Nehemiah has made himself
equal with his fellow Jews, laboring with them and not using his position for
gain.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:17–18 At my table seems to refer to Nehemiah’s
obligations as governor. Those who came . . . from the nations may have been
diplomatic visitors. This heavy burden makes Nehemiah’s self-sacrifice of the
food allowance all the more remarkable.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 5:19 Remember. The first of Nehemiah’s prayers asking
God to remember either his deeds or his opponents’ deeds (compare 6:14;
13:29).
6:1–7:4 A Conspiracy against Nehemiah, but the Wall Is Finished. Nehemiah’s
enemies try to scare him into ceasing the work, but he is not deterred and the
wall is finished.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:2 Hakkephirim in the plain of Ono. This unknown
place is presumably near the town of Ono (see Ezra 2:33), north of Jerusalem,
perhaps serving as a neutral ground. Nehemiah sees it as a conspiracy, since he
knows they want to interrupt his work.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:3 I am doing a great work and I cannot come down.
Nehemiah refused to leave his work for discussions with his enemies. He knew
such a meeting would be fruitless and probably dangerous.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:5–7 Sanballat’s fifth attempt to defeat Nehemiah was
an open letter (v. 5). Its public nature was intended to exert extra pressure on
Nehemiah. Sanballat once again accuses the people of rebelling against Persia
(see Ezra 4:12–13). He portrays himself as loyal to Persia and as a friend of the
Jews. He offers to defuse the danger posed by their supposed rebellion. The
king will hear is, of course, a veiled threat. While he may have held long-term
messianic hopes, Nehemiah remained a loyal servant of Artaxerxes. He had no
desire to be king, and there is no reason to think he was a descendant of David.
FACT
An open letter (6:5) was one that was read to the entire public, not just the
individual to whom it was addressed. By publicly claiming that Artaxerxes
would be angry about the rebuilding of the walls, Sanballat was hoping to
frighten the laborers into ceasing their work.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:10–11 Shemaiah is not otherwise known, but he may
have been a priest, which explains his proposal for a meeting in the temple
(perhaps a second meeting from the one mentioned here). confined to his
home. This possible translation of a difficult Hebrew word tries to explain why
Nehemiah went to this man’s house. It is not clear why he had been confined to
his home: perhaps it was meant as a symbolic act suggesting that Jerusalem
was surrounded by enemies. within the temple . . . for they are coming to kill
you. This “warning” suggests a plot by Sanballat and other enemies. Shemaiah
proposes that Nehemiah simply take refuge in the temple. Nehemiah replies
that such an act would be cowardly.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:12 God had not sent him. Nehemiah sees that
Shemaiah’s prophecy was false.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:13 To be afraid would be the opposite of having faith
in this situation, and so would be sin (see Deut. 1:28–33; note on Ezra 3:3).
This sort of unbelief would allow his enemies to taunt Nehemiah (see Neh.
5:9) and thus undermine his authority.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:14 Remember. See note on 5:19; compare 1:8.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:15–16 Elul was the sixth month (August/September),
so it has been less than six months since Nehemiah spoke to the king. they
perceived that this work had been accomplished with the help of our God.
If God had helped the people of Judah, the nations feared he would turn Judah
into a powerful nation that would be a threat to them.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:17 The nobles of Judah were cooperating with
Tobiah. They were connected because Tobiah, an “Ammonite” (2:10), and his
son had married into Jewish nobility. Ezra’s measures against intermarriage
(Ezra 9–10) perhaps explain Tobiah’s hostility to Nehemiah’s work.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 6:18 bound by oath to him. It is not clear how they were
bound. But there was clearly a powerful group in Jerusalem committed to
Tobiah and opposed to Nehemiah.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 7:1 Gatekeepers, singers, Levites is a typical grouping
of worship officials (see Ezra 2:40–42). It is surprising to find them guarding
the walls. Yet protecting the city was ultimately related to establishing the
worship of Yahweh in his temple.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 7:2–3 On Hanani, see 1:2. He and Hananiah possibly
replace the “rulers” named in 3:9, 12. The appointed guards live in the city and
so they are most committed to it.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 7:4 Apparently the people are relatively few. Building
houses has taken second place to reconstructing the walls.
FACT
Can Nehemiah’s wall be seen today? In the 2,500 years since Nehemiah’s
day, Jerusalem has been rebuilt, destroyed, and rebuilt again. This has made
evidence of Nehemiah’s wall difficult to find. However, a part of the wall
can still be seen.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 7:5–73 A Record of Those Who Returned from Exile.
Nehemiah lists the returned exiles from the time of Zerubbabel.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 7:5 my God put it into my heart. See 2:12. As seen in
his frequent prayers, Nehemiah maintains a close relationship with the Lord.
He decides to take a census of the people. He is helped by the discovery of the
book of the genealogy of the first returnees.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 7:6–73 This list is virtually identical to the one in Ezra 2
(see notes there). Nehemiah’s next concern is to repopulate Jerusalem (see
Neh. 7:4).
8:1–10:39 The Reading of the Law, and Covenant Renewal. In this long
section, the Book of the Law is solemnly read, the Feast of Booths is kept, and
a great act of covenant renewal is performed. For the first time in this book,
Ezra enters the story. This shows the unity of his and Nehemiah’s projects.
With the walls securely in place, the Mosaic law is once again made prominent.
It is not security or the temple that is most essential to the life of the
community; trust in God and obedience to his Word are most important.
8:1–8 The Law Is Read. Ezra reads the Book of the Law to all the people, and
the Levites ensure that everyone has understood it.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 8:2 The inclusion of both men and women is stressed,
since the strict keeping of the great Jerusalem feasts was expected of men only
(Deut. 16:16–17). all who could understand. “Understanding” is a key theme
in this chapter, since it was vital that all should know God’s law. The teaching
of the law may have been neglected in the nearly one hundred years since the
first return from Babylon. The first day of the seventh month was a day of
rest, like a Sabbath, in the month of the Day of Atonement (see Lev. 23:24–25,
27, 34).
FACT
The Feast of Booths (8:2) marked the end of the agricultural year. It was a
time to celebrate God’s provision and to ask his blessing for the next year’s
crops. Once every seven years, the Book of the Law of Moses was to be read
during the festival. This was done to instruct the children and as a reminder
for the adults.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 8:3–5 from early morning until midday. The book was
lengthy, and there may have been frequent pauses for explanation (see note on
v. 7). opened the book. The act of reading, in this setting, is also a corporate
act of worship.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 8:7 The Levites presumably moved among the crowd,
ensuring that all could understand. Such interpretation was one of their special
tasks (see Deut. 33:10; 2 Chron. 17:7–9).
8:9–12 The People Are to Be Joyful. Though sorrow for sin was the desired
response to the teaching, joy at renewed relationship with God was its ultimate
purpose. the joy of the LORD is your strength. As the people rejoiced in God,
he would show himself strong to help and defend them. Eat . . . drink . . . send
portions are important themes of worship in Deuteronomy, associated with
God’s rich gifts and the privilege of sharing them (Deut. 12:12; 14:23, 26, 27–
29).
8:13–18 The People Keep the Feast of Booths. This family-oriented festival
highlighted God’s protection of Israel in the desert, before the conquest of
Canaan.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 8:13–15 The following day, as the leaders study the
Law, they realize they are in the month of the Feast of Booths, the feast of the
seventh month (Lev. 23:33–43). During this feast the people lived in
temporary dwellings made from branches to commemorate how they had lived
in booths in the wilderness (Lev. 23:43).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 8:17–18 Jeshua is another form of “Joshua.” had not
done so. Although the Feast of Booths had been celebrated on occasion (see 1
Kings 8:65; 2 Chron. 7:9; Ezra 3:4), it had apparently not been celebrated in
this way (with such great joy, or in such unsettled conditions, or with all the
people participating). seven days. See Lev. 23:34. For the reading of the law at
the Feast of Booths (every seven years), see Deut. 31:10–11.
9:1–38 A Prayer of Confession, Penitence, and Covenant Com­ mitment. The
next phase in the great act of covenant renewal is a prayer of praise,
confession, and petition.
FACT
Word pictures for worship and teaching. Religious images were strictly
forbidden under the Mosaic law, but Israel’s leaders often used vivid
imagery in their story-telling to teach the people and to help them worship.
Chapter 9 gives an example of this, as the Levites publicly recite the nation’s
history, from creation to the present.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:1 the twenty-fourth day. It is still the seventh month,
after the seven days of the Feast of Booths and an eighth day of solemn
assembly (8:18).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:2–3 separated themselves from all foreigners. See
Ezra 9–10. Here it refers not just to marriage but also to the integrity of the
community in general. iniquities of their fathers. That is, of all previous
generations, as in the prayer that follows (Neh. 9:6–37).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:6–37 The prayer mixes confession with memories of
God’s grace and petition. It follows the biblical story as told in Genesis–Kings.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:6 You are the LORD, you alone. The uniqueness of
Israel’s God was proclaimed in the story of creation. Heaven . . . the earth
sums up the whole creation (see Gen. 1:1; Ex. 20:11). All their host could
refer to either angels or stars.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:7–8 Ur of the Chaldeans is in southern Mesopotamia
(see Gen. 11:31). the name Abraham. See Gen. 17:5. the covenant. God
promised Abraham both descendants and land. The promise to drive out other
nations has particular meaning in this period of restoration to the land.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:9–11 heard their cry at the Red Sea. This condenses
the whole story from Exodus 2–15 (see Ex. 2:23–25; 14:1–15:27). signs and
wonders . . . divided the sea. This refers to the miracles done to compel
Pharaoh to release the Israelites (Exodus 7–15).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:12 The pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire provided
God’s guidance (see Ex. 13:21–22).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:13–14 Mount Sinai is where God gave the Ten
Commandments and detailed instructions for applying them (rules, laws,
statutes, commandments).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:15 bread from heaven . . . water. Compare Ex. 16:14–
15; 17:6.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:16–18 appointed a leader. See Num. 14:4. The people
must have gone ahead and chosen a different leader, though Numbers 14
contains no record of it. Golden calf refers to the rebellion committed while
the covenant was still being made at Sinai (Exodus 32; Deut. 9:7–21).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:21 Forty years. See Deut. 2:7. Their clothes did not
wear out and their feet did not swell. From Deut. 8:4, recalling God’s
extraordinary preservation of his people.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:23 stars of heaven. See Deut. 1:10.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:26–28 This pattern of sin, judgment, repentance, and
deliverance is typical of the book of Judges. killed your prophets. Compare
Matt. 23:31; Acts 7:52.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:29–31 The story of God’s long patience with the
Israelites’ sin, finally ending in judgment, is told in 1–2 Kings (see especially 2
Kings 17).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:30–31 you gave them into the hand of the peoples.
The northern kingdom was “[given] into the hand of” Assyria (2 Kings 17);
Judah was conquered by Babylon (2 Kings 24–25). you did not make an end
of them. God rescued his people from exile, as recorded in 2 Chron. 36:22–23
and in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:32–33 All the hardship refers to the sufferings of both
exiles (Assyrian and Babylonian). Yet God has been righteous in his judgment.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 9:36–38 we are slaves. The people’s continuing
sinfulness explains why they are not yet entirely free. To resolve this situation,
the people will enter a solemn covenant.
10:1–39 Signatories and Specific Commitments. Many of the people agree to
the covenant, and they accept the responsibility of funding the temple’s
activities.
FACT
Seals in the ancient Near East (e.g., 10:1) were stamps pressed into soft wax
on documents that demonstrated ownership or authorship.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:1–27 The long list of names shows that the entire
community supported the covenant.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:29 a curse and an oath. The two expressions together
show the people’s serious intention to keep their commitment.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:30 Mosaic law prohibited intermarriage with the
peoples of the land because they worshiped other gods. This is in the forefront
because it was such a problem recently (Ezra 9–10).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:31 The Sabbath commandment (Ex. 20:8–11; Deut.
5:12–15) was a key marker of Israel’s identity. Trading with surrounding
peoples on the Sabbath must have been a temptation (see Neh. 13:16–22).
crops of the seventh year. The Sabbath idea extended to the seventh year,
when normal cultivation was prohibited (Lev. 25:2–7).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:32 third part of a shekel. No Mosaic law requires
this tax. It is a new commitment to support the service of the house of our
God. (However, compare Ex. 30:11–16.)
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:33–34 showbread. See Lev. 24:5–9. wood offering.
Again, no specific law requires this tax, but the need for it is implied in Lev.
6:12–13. This is why it is described as written in the Law.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:35–37 These agricultural offerings were to supply
temple personnel, as specified in various laws (e.g., Ex. 23:19; Num. 18:12–
13), but they were not always paid (see Neh. 13:10).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:36 firstborn of our sons. On the redemption of
firstborn sons, see note on Ex. 13:2. herds . . . flocks. See Num. 18:15–18;
Deut. 15:19–23.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:37 first of our dough. See Num. 15:20–21; Deut.
18:4. Tithes are for the Levites, according to Num. 18:21–24, though the entire
nation is invited to partake of the tithe in Deut. 14:22–27.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 10:38 tithe of the tithes. The Levites give part of the
tithe to the priests (Num. 18:25–32).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:1–12:43 The Population of Jerusalem and the
Villages; Priests and Levites. These chapters depict the people’s efforts to
populate Jerusalem.
FACT
Why did the small towns of Judah send people to live in Jerusalem? In
Nehemiah’s time, Jerusalem was only one-fourth the size it had been before
the exile. No one wanted to live in a city without defensive walls. Once the
walls were completed, however, the community leaders wanted Jerusalem to
become a thriving capital city once again. This meant transplanting citizens
from the small towns (11:1–2).
11:1–36 Those Who Lived in Jerusalem and the Villages of Judah. This chapter
addresses the need to maintain a proportion of the population in Jerusalem, and
records the names of leaders who lived there. Populated villages of Judah are
also named.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:1 The community’s leaders are concentrated in
Jerusalem, but it is underpopulated (see also 7:4). The people in the provincial
towns cast lots to decide who should relocate to the capital.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:3–4 The temple servants, along with gatekeepers and
singers (vv. 19, 21–22), were classes of Levites (see Ezra 2:40–43). the
descendants of Solomon’s servants. See note on Ezra 2:55–58. sons of Judah
. . . sons of Benjamin. These two tribes of the southern kingdom were exiled
in Babylon, and now they make up the restored community.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:11–12 The ruler of the house of God is the high
priest. Work of the house probably means work inside the temple; contrast
“outside,” v. 16.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:15–16 The Levites were responsible for the outside
work of the house of God, a lesser role than that of the priests in v. 12.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:20–21 the rest of Israel. That is, after a tenth of the
population had been resettled in Jerusalem (v. 1). His inheritance refers to
property owned by one’s ancestors (see note on Ezra 2:59–63). Ophel. See
note on Neh. 3:26.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:23–24 Command from the king must refer to the
Persian king. The note about Pethahiah being at the king’s side indicates he
oversaw Jewish affairs at the royal court.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:30 from Beersheba to the Valley of Hinnom. The
people of Judah lived south of Jerusalem. Beersheba was in the far south, and
the Valley of Hinnom was on the southern edge of Jerusalem.
Judea under Persian Rule
538–332 B.C.
Under Persian rule, the lands of Israel (now called Samaria) and Judah (now called Judea) were minor
provinces within the satrapy called Beyond the River. Returning Judeans settled mostly in the province of
Judea, but a few settled in the plain of Ono and Idumea as well. The fact that the plain of Ono lay outside
the jurisdiction of Judea may explain why Nehemiah suspected that the other local governors intended to
do him harm there.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:31–35 The villages of Benjamin were mainly north
and west of Jerusalem.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 11:36 The Levites were in effect a third tribe in the
restored community.
12:1–26 High Priests and Leading Levites since the Time of Zerubbabel. This
section records the priests and Levites from the time of Zerubbabel (c. 538–535
B.C.) to Nehemiah. The aim is to show that the Levitical service continued
during a very difficult time in Israel’s history.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:1a Zerubbabel . . . and Jeshua. See note on Ezra
2:2a. Zerubbabel was the first leader of the returning exiles following King
Cyrus’s decree in 538 B.C., about a century before Nehemiah. Jeshua the high
priest returned with him.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:12–21 Joiakim was high priest after Jeshua (see v.
10), so this list gives the priests in his day, including Ezra (v. 13). heads of
fathers’ houses (v. 12). The list proceeds by family names: thus, Meraiah was
priest in the (priestly) family of Seraiah.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:22–23 As with the priests, a record of Levites was
kept by families.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:22 Darius the Persian is Darius I (522–486 B.C.),
king of Persia at the time of Zerubbabel and the building of the temple (see
Ezra 4:5, 24; 5:1–17; 6:1–22).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:23 Book of the Chronicles. This is not the biblical
book of that name, but simply a record of names, perhaps kept by the priests.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:24–26 This is a similar record (see v. 23) for the time
of Joiakim and later (see v. 10). David the man of God. See v. 36; 1 Chron.
25:2; 2 Chron. 8:14 in connection with David’s organizing priests and Levites
for temple service. Joiakim was high priest in Ezra’s time (see Neh. 12:12).
12:27–43 Dedication of the Walls. This section describes the Levites’ role at
the dedication of the completed city wall. Two great choirs precede the leaders
in two companies on the wall, north and south.
FACT
Dedications were ceremonies performed to consecrate something or
someone for service to the Lord.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:28–29 Levitical singers had settled in villages
around Jerusalem near their work. The Netophathites were from Netophah,
near Bethlehem. Beth-gilgal is presumably Gilgal, near Jericho (see Josh.
4:19). Geba and Azmaveth were north of Jerusalem.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:30 They had purified themselves, as in readiness for
worship (see Ex. 19:10, 14–15; Num. 8:5–7).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:31–40 Two great choirs symbolically enclose the
whole city for the dedication. Ezra goes with the southern group, Nehemiah
with the northern. Dung Gate (v. 31). See note on 2:13–15. Fountain Gate . . .
Water Gate (12:37). See note on 3:26. For details of the wall’s layout, see
2:11–16 and 3:1–32. Both groups continue into the temple area to conclude the
ceremony.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 12:44–13:31 Nehemiah Deals with Problems in the
Community. This section records problems that arose in relation to storing
contributions for the temple and its personnel. It also describes Nehemiah’s
ongoing problems with his people and his opponents.
12:44–47 The Administration of Offerings for the Temple. These verses
emphasize that the work of the priests and Levites had been in place since
ancient times, and that since the days of Zerubbabel (a century before
Nehemiah) they had been duly provided for. On that day. Arrangements for
tithes and other offerings are made once again, at the dedication of the wall.
portions required by the Law. The Mosaic requirement (Lev. 7:33) applied
only to the priests, but here it is widened to include all the Levites.
13:1–9 Ejection of Tobiah the Ammonite from the Temple. While Nehemiah
was in the Persian capital of Susa, reporting to the king (v. 6; see note on 2:4–
6), his opponents took advantage of his absence and gave a non-Israelite a
place to live in the temple. Upon his return to Jerusalem, Nehemiah discovered
the problem and corrected it.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:1–3 no Ammonite or Moabite. Moabites and
Ammonites were specifically excluded from Israel’s religious assembly
because of their historical conflict with Israel and their idolatry (see Numbers
22–25; Deut. 23:3–5). separated . . . foreign descent. This resembles
measures Ezra had taken a decade or so earlier (Ezra 9–10). Note Ezra 6:21,
however, which allowed foreigners to join Israel if they embraced the Jewish
religion. Compare also the story of Ruth, who came to faith in Israel’s God
even though she was a Moabite.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:4–9 The connection of these verses with vv. 1–3 is
that Tobiah, an enemy of the community (2:10; 4:7–8), was an Ammonite.
Eliashib’s offense is also related to proper care of tithes and offerings (12:44),
because he gave Tobiah a room in the temple reserved for storing these.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:4 Now before this. The time is unspecified.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:6 I was not in Jerusalem. Nehemiah had been called
back to the Persian court in the thirty-second year (433 B.C.; see 1:1) for an
unspecified time. The journey between Jerusalem and Susa took about 55 days
(see note on 4:7–8). Eliashib (see 12:10) may have taken advantage of
Nehemiah’s absence, which may have been lengthy.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:9 Cleansed, that is, purified in a ritual sense.
Nehemiah sees the misuse of the temple as a violation of its holiness. He
restores the polluted area to its proper use.
FACT
Tobiah was not a priest, so moving his household furniture into the temple
desecrated the area (13:5, 7). His presence in the temple also meant that one
of Nehemiah’s fierce opponents had been given a luxurious home in the
temple.
13:10–14 Dealing with Neglect of the Offerings. The people had stopped
providing for the Levites, so they had fled each to his field, where they could
provide for themselves and their families. This, of course, had a negative
impact on worship at the temple. Contrast the commitments made by the
people in 10:32–39. Nehemiah responds by organizing the administration of
the offerings. I confronted the officials. Note Nehemiah’s fearless action (see
also 13:17). Remember me. Compare 1:8; 5:19; 6:14.
13:15–22 Dealing with Sabbath Breaking. The community once again sins, this
time by breaking the Sabbath by trading.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:16 Tyrians. Foreigners would not be bound by the
Sabbath law, of course, but they find a ready market on the Sabbath among the
Jews.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:18 Did not your fathers act in this way? Breaking
the Sabbath was an obvious sign of previous generations’ lack of commitment
to God (see Jer. 17:19–27; Amos 8:4–6). Here it is given as the reason for the
exile.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:19–22 Nehemiah still has authority and resources to
enforce his reforms (though it is not clear whether he is still governor).
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:22 the Levites . . . purify themselves. The gatekeeper
Levites had been neglecting their duties. They needed to be ritually purified
again for their task.
13:23–29 The Problem of Intermarriage Again. As the returned exiles ignored
covenantal commitments such as Sabbath keeping, they began losing their
sense of identity as God’s special people. One result was more intermarriages
with pagans.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:23–27 Ezra’s action against intermarriage (Ezra 9–10)
apparently had little lasting effect. By losing the language of Judah (Neh.
13:24), the children of mixed marriages were losing their entire religious
heritage.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:25–28 Nehemiah calls the people back to the Mosaic
law (Deut. 7:1–5) and cites the example of Solomon, who was turned away
from the Lord by his foreign wives (1 Kings 11). Spiritual unfaithfulness in
intermarriage has even affected the family of the high priest Eliashib.
NEHEMIAH—NOTE ON 13:29 Remember them. See also 6:14. covenant of the
priesthood. The special obligations of the priests and Levites, for the sake of
the whole people (see 1 Sam. 2:27–36; Mal. 2:4–9).
13:30–31 Summary of Nehemiah’ s Temple Reforms. These verses highlight all
that Nehemiah has done to ensure pure worship in the temple and to establish
proper support for the priests. wood offering. See 10:34. Remember me.
Nehemiah asks the Lord to take note of his faithful actions (see also 1:8; 5:19;
6:14; 13:14).
E s t h e r
(return to table of contents)
Esther 1 • Esther 2 • Esther 3 • Esther 4 • Esther 5 • Esther 6 • Esther 7
•
Esther 8 • Esther 9 • Esther 10
Introduction to Esther
Timeline
Author and Date
Overview and Purpose
Key Themes
Outline
The Persian Empire at the Time of Esther
Global Message of Esther
Esther and the Sovereign Rule of God
Still the Chosen People of God?
Universal Themes in Esther
The Global Message of Esther for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Esther
Introduction to Esther
Timeline
Author and Date
Like many OT books, Esther is an anonymous work. It is possible that the
author was someone like Mordecai, who had access to historical documents
(2:23; 6:1) and an interest in Jewish affairs.
Esther belongs to the period after the Babylonian exile, when Persia had
replaced Babylon as the ruling power. The story is set in Susa, one of the
Persian capitals, during the reign of King Ahasuerus, better known by his
Greek name, Xerxes I (486–464 B.C.). Some Jews had returned to Jerusalem,
where they enjoyed a reasonable amount of control over their own affairs.
Others, like Esther and Mordecai, were still in exile. As a minority group, the
Jews were viewed with suspicion and sometimes faced threats to their
existence.
Overview and Purpose
The book of Esther tells how a Jewish girl became the queen of Persia and
saved her people from a plot to destroy them. She is assisted in this by
Mordecai, her cousin and guardian.
Esther was written to explain the origin of the Feast of Purim and to ensure
that it would be observed by all future generations of the Jewish people (9:28).
It has clearly achieved this purpose, since Jews have continued to observe
Purim to the present day. The book of Esther is read as part of the celebration
of Purim.
Esther is part of a much larger story that runs all the way from Abraham to
Christ and, through him, to the church. If Haman had succeeded, the Jewish
people as a whole would have been destroyed, and the story of God’s saving
work in and through Abraham’s descendants would have come to an end. There
would have been no fulfillment in Christ, and therefore no gospel and no
Christian church. Christians should read the book of Esther, not just as a story
about the Jews but as part of their own heritage. Christians are not obliged to
observe the Feast of Purim, but they are to take to heart the truth that God
providentially watches over his own (Rom. 8:28).
Key Themes
Esther is an entertaining historical story that also reveals important truths about
how and why the Jews survived such an overwhelming threat:
1. Divine providence. God is not mentioned by name in the book of Esther.
But it shows clearly that, even when God is most hidden, he is still
working to protect his chosen people.
2. Human responsibility. Esther and Mordecai show great initiative and
courage. Their actions are obviously significant. The providence of God
does not negate the responsibility of people to act with courage and
resolve when circumstances require it.
3. The absurdity of wickedness. Ahasuerus and Haman were important
people who had considerable power. But the story of Esther often causes
laughter at their expense. The proud people of this world are not nearly as
powerful as they think they are. When they oppose God’s people they
bring about their own destruction. God laughs at such people (Ps. 2:4).
The story of Esther invites us to laugh with him.
Outline
I. Introduction (1:1–2:23)
II. Main Action (3:1–9:19)
III. Conclusion (9:20–10:3)
The Persian Empire at the Time of Esther
c. 479 B.C.
Long before Esther’s time, the people of Israel and Judah (later called Jews)
had been dispersed throughout the Near East by the Assyrians and the
Babylonians. Eventually the Persians absorbed nearly all of these lands into
their empire, which reached its greatest extent during the time of Esther. Thus
Haman’s plot to exterminate all Jews throughout the Persian Empire would
have annihilated virtually all of the Jewish people, and Esther’s daring actions
saved the whole nation from complete destruction.
The Global Message of Esther
Esther and the Sovereign Rule of God
The book of Esther is set far away from the Promised Land, on the opposite
end of the world in the city of Susa, the capital of the powerful Persian
empire (c. 539–331 B.C.). After the Babylonian empire destroyed the
Jerusalem temple and decimated the kingdom of Judah (587/586 B.C.), a
significant portion of the remaining Jewish population was exiled to
Babylon. After Cyrus defeated the Babylonians and established his Persian
empire, Cyrus granted freedom for the exiled Jewish people to return to
their homeland and rebuild their temple (c. 539 B.C.). Some, but not all, of
the Jews returned to the Promised Land and began to rebuild their lives.
Others remained in exile and began to build Jewish communities in the
Persian empire. Esther and Mordecai, the main characters of the book of
Esther, were from families that chose to remain.
The book of Esther is in the Bible to show us that the hiddenness of God
is not the absence of God. Even though God is not even mentioned in the
entire book, he sovereignly and mercifully preserves his poeple in the midst
of adversity.
Still the Chosen People of God?
After the Jewish exiles returned to the homeland, they entered what is
called the postexilic (“after the exile”) period of their existence. It was a
time of great uncertainty, and the people had many questions. Were they
still the people of God, or was God finished with them? And if homeland
Jews were still the people of God, what about those Jews who never
returned but chose to remain behind and live among the pagans? Were they
still members of the covenant people, or had they forfeited their
inheritance?
Therefore, while the immediate purpose of the book of Esther was to
explain why all Jews everywhere should celebrate Purim (a festival not
prescribed by the Law of Moses; see Est. 9:26–32), its deeper and more
significant purpose was to demonstrate that the postexilic Jews—even those
outside the Land—remained the chosen people of God. Through them, God
was still committed by covenant to accomplish his plan of worldwide
redemption and new creation. They were therefore protected by his quiet
yet overruling sovereignty from all pagan attempts to destroy them until the
“fullness of time,” when Israel gave the Messiah to the world (Gal. 4:4).
Universal Themes in Esther
The sovereign rule of God. The primary theme of Esther that is universally
applicable to global Christians is the sovereign rule of God, even amid
seemingly insignificant events. The book of Esther is noteworthy for its
complete lack of any mention of God. This has caused some to question
whether it belongs in Scripture. The lack of reference to God, however,
works as a literary device to make the reader realize that God is on every
page. Throughout the book, God is controlling, directing, and working
through all the seemingly trivial circumstances in order to protect his people
and accomplish his ultimate purpose of cosmic redemption.
Coincidences? Note how the following “coincidences” work in the book
to attain God’s purposes. First, how wonderful that Esther was so beautiful
and that King Ahasuerus chose her from among all the young women of the
kingdom to be his next queen (Est. 2:17). Second, how fortunate that
Mordecai overheard the plot against the king and rescued him from
assassination, and that Mordecai’s valiant deed of loyalty was recorded in
the royal archives (2:21–23). Third, note that when Esther presented herself
before the king (which, in Persian law, was punishable by death), she “won
favor in his sight” and was spared and allowed to speak (5:2). Fourth, it was
quite a stroke of good fortune that the king could not sleep and therefore
ordered that the chronicles of memorable deeds should be read to him; that
the scribe just happened to read about Mordecai and his heroic act; and that
the king was alert enough to ask whether Mordecai had been rewarded for
his deed (6:1–3). Fifth, how ironic for Haman to walk in just as the king
was considering how he might honor Mordecai for his deed (6:4–12). Sixth,
how unfortunate for Haman that he “was falling on the couch where Esther
was” to beg for his life just as the king returned, and the king interpreted
Haman’s move as an assault upon Esther (7:8). Seventh, how interesting
that Mordecai was made second in command in place of Haman over all of
the vast Persian empire (8:2; 10:2–3).
God works all things together for good. Are these events insignificant
circumstances? Are they merely chance? Or are they examples of God
quietly yet sovereignly working on behalf of his people to accomplish his
purposes? The Lord so governs situations that he overrules and thwarts the
schemes of those who would seek to destroy his chosen people and works
them instead for ultimate good (see Rom. 8:28).
The Global Message of Esther for Today
Living in exile. The contemporary church around the world has much to
learn from the book of Esther concerning empire and living in exile. With
the church now a global faith, it finds itself located increasingly within
countries that are unfamiliar with the Christian tradition or even hostile to
it. The global church in many places now lives an “exiled” sort of existence
under pagan rule or tyrannical leaders, in circumstances similar to those
faced by Esther and Mordecai under Persian imperial rule. In the New
Testament, the book of Acts narrates how regularly the church had to
navigate the precarious waters of a pagan empire. In fact, the Roman
empire crushed the key figures of the New Testament. Pontius Pilate, a
Roman procurator, crucified Jesus. King Herod Agrippa beheaded James
(Acts 12:1–2). Caesar executed Peter and Paul in Rome. Roman power
exiled John to the island of Patmos (Rev. 1:9).
Global sojourners. The letter of 1 Peter teaches the global church that its
members are “exiles of the Dispersion” and “sojourners” (1 Pet. 1:1; 2:11).
As disciples lived out their new faith before their pagan neighbors, this at
times resulted in misunderstanding, suffering, and persecution (1 Pet. 2:12;
4:12–13, 16, 19; 5:9–10). Undoubtedly, this felt like “exile,” as Christians
realized that they no longer fit in with the immoral and idolatrous culture
around them. The Roman empire was no longer their true home. They lived
in the Roman empire, and they were Romans citizens (or freedmen, or
slaves), but they no longer acted like Romans in numerous and important
ways. Ultimately, however, Peter meant something more significant when
he called the early Christians “exiles” and “sojourners.” He has theological
exile in view. Like Abraham, who wandered as a homeless “exile” and
“sojourner” in the very land that God had promised to him (Gen. 23:4),
Christians are exiles and sojourners in the very land that they will inherit—
the whole world (Rom. 4:13). They do not inherit it now, as it lies broken in
its present and fallen state, but they will enjoy the liberated and renewed
world when all is accomplished in Christ (Rom. 8:18–25; Phil. 3:20–21).
Working for justice and compassion. The book of Esther illustrates that,
while the Christian community journeys in this exiled existence and waits
in hope for “relief and deliverance” (Est. 4:14), some believers may find
themselves in positions of government within the empires in which they
reside. Christians should not be anxious about working in such contexts, but
should instead use the God-given opportunity to work for just and
compassionate legislation, which promotes peace and stability for all
citizens. In this way, they anticipate the life of the new creation and bring a
glimmer of light to a dark world.
The King’s Banquets