NEHEMIAH 1 [†]The words of a Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah.
Now it happened in the month of b Chislev, c in the twentieth year, as I
was in d Susa the citadel, 2[†]that e Hanani, one of my brothers, came with
certain men from Judah. And I asked them concerning the Jews who
escaped, who had survived the exile, and concerning Jerusalem. 3And they
said to me, “The remnant there in the province who had survived the exile
is in great trouble and f shame. g The wall of Jerusalem is broken down,
h and its gates are destroyed by fire.”
Nehemiah’s Prayer
4[†]As soon as I heard these words I i sat down and wept and mourned for
days, and I continued fasting and praying before the j God of heaven.
5[†]And I said, “O LORD God of heaven, k the great and awesome God who
keeps covenant and steadfast love with those who love him and keep his
commandments, 6[†] l let your ear be attentive and your eyes open, to hear
the prayer of your servant that I now pray before you day and night for the
people of Israel your servants, m confessing the sins of the people of Israel,
which we have sinned against you. Even n I and my father’s house have
sinned. 7[†] o We have acted very corruptly against you and have not kept
the commandments, the statutes, and the rules p that you commanded your
servant Moses. 8Remember the word that you commanded your servant
Moses, saying, ‘If you are unfaithful, q I will scatter you among the
peoples, 9[†] r but if you return to me and keep my commandments and do
them, s though your outcasts are in the uttermost parts of heaven, from there
I will gather them and bring them t to the place that I have chosen, to make
my name dwell there.’ 10[†] u They are your servants and your people,
whom you have redeemed by your great power and by your strong hand.
11[†]O Lord, l let your ear be attentive to the prayer of your servant, and to
the prayer of your servants who delight to fear your name, and give success
to your servant today, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man.”
Now I was v cupbearer to the king.
Nehemiah Sent to Judah