NEHEMIAH 6 [†]Now when a Sanballat and Tobiah and b Geshem the Arab
and the rest of our enemies heard that I had built the wall and that there was
no breach left in it ( c although up to that time I had not set up the doors in
the gates), 2[†]Sanballat and Geshem sent to me, saying, “Come and let us
meet together at Hakkephirim in the plain of d Ono.” But they intended to
do me harm. 3[†]And I sent messengers to them, saying, “I am doing a great
work and I cannot come down. Why should the work stop while I leave it
and come down to you?” 4And they sent to me four times in this way, and I
answered them in the same manner.
5[†]In the same way Sanballat for the
fifth time sent his servant to me with an open letter in his hand. 6In it was
written, “It is reported among the nations, and Geshem [1] also says it, that
you and e the Jews intend to rebel; that is why you are building the wall.
And according to these reports you wish to become their king. 7And you
have also set up prophets to proclaim concerning you in Jerusalem, ‘There
is a king in Judah.’ And now the king will hear of these reports. So now
come and let us take counsel together.” 8Then I sent to him, saying, “No
such things as you say have been done, for you are inventing them out of
your own mind.” 9For they all wanted to frighten us, thinking, “Their hands
will drop from the work, and it will not be done.” But now, O God, [2]
strengthen my hands.
10[†]Now when I went into the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah,
son of Mehetabel, who was f confined to his home, he said, “Let us meet
together in the house of God, within the temple. Let us close the doors of
the temple, for they are coming to kill you. They are coming to kill you by
night.” 11But I said, “Should such a man as I run away? And what man such
as I could go into the temple and live? [3] I will not go in.” 12[†]And I
understood and saw that God had not sent him, g but he had pronounced the
prophecy against me because Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him. 13[†]For
this purpose he was hired, that I should be afraid and act in this way and
sin, and so they could give me a bad name in order to taunt me.
14[†] h Remember Tobiah and Sanballat, O my God, according to these
things that they did, and also i the prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the
prophets who wanted to make me afraid.
The Wall Is Finished
15[†]So the wall was finished on the twenty-fifth day of the month Elul, in
fifty-two days. 16And j when all our enemies heard of it, all the nations
around us were afraid and fell greatly in their own esteem, k for they
perceived that this work had been accomplished with the help of our God.
17[†]Moreover, in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters to
Tobiah, and Tobiah’s letters came to them. 18[†]For many in Judah were
bound by oath to him, because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son
of l Arah: and his son Jehohanan had taken the daughter of m Meshullam
the son of Berechiah as his wife. 19Also they spoke of his good deeds in my
presence and reported my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to make me
afraid.