NEHEMIAH 2 [†]In the month of Nisan, w in the twentieth year of King
x Artaxerxes, when wine was before him, y I took up the wine and gave it to
the king. Now I had not been sad in his presence. 2[†]And the king said to
me, “Why is your face sad, seeing you are not sick? This is nothing but
z sadness of the heart.” Then I was very much afraid. 3[†]I said to the king,
a “Let the king live forever! Why should not my face be sad, b when the
city, the place of my fathers’ graves, lies in ruins, and its gates have been
destroyed by fire?” 4[†]Then the king said to me, “What are you
requesting?” So I prayed c to the God of heaven. 5And I said to the king, “If
it pleases the king, and if your servant has found favor in your sight, that
you send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers’ graves, that I may rebuild
it.” 6And the king said to me ( d the queen sitting beside him), “How long
will you be gone, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send
me e when I had given him a time. 7[†]And I said to the king, “If it pleases
the king, let letters be given me f to the governors of the province Beyond
the River, that they may let me pass through until I come to Judah, 8and a
letter to Asaph, the keeper of the king’s forest, that he may give me timber
to make beams for the gates of g the fortress of the temple, and for the wall
of the city, and for the house that I shall occupy.” And the king granted me
what I asked, h for the good hand of my God was upon me.
Nehemiah Inspects Jerusalem’s Walls
9[†]Then I came to i the governors of the province Beyond the River and
gave them the king’s letters. Now the king had sent with me officers of the
army and horsemen. 10[†]But when j Sanballat the Horonite and k Tobiah
the Ammonite servant heard this, it displeased them greatly that someone
had come to seek the welfare of the people of Israel.
11[†] l So I went to Jerusalem and was there three days. 12Then I arose in
the night, I and a few men with me. And I told no one what my God had put
into my heart to do for Jerusalem. There was no animal with me but the one
on which I rode. 13[†]I went out by night by m the Valley Gate to the
Dragon Spring and to n the Dung Gate, and I inspected the walls of
Jerusalem o that were broken down p and its gates that had been destroyed
by fire. 14Then I went on to q the Fountain Gate and to r the King’s Pool,
but there was no room for the animal that was under me to pass. 15Then I
went up in the night s by the valley and inspected the wall, and I turned
back and entered by the Valley Gate, and so returned. 16And the officials
did not know where I had gone or what I was doing, and I had not yet told
the Jews, the priests, the nobles, the officials, and the rest who were to do
the work.
17[†]Then I said to them, “You see the trouble we are in, t how Jerusalem
lies in ruins with its gates burned. Come, let us build the wall of Jerusalem,
that we may no longer u suffer derision.” 18[†]And I told them v of the hand
of my God that had been upon me for good, and also of the words that the
king had spoken to me. And they said, “Let us rise up and build.” w So they
strengthened their hands for the good work. 19[†]But when Sanballat the
Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite servant and x Geshem the Arab heard of
it, y they jeered at us and despised us and said, “What is this thing that you
are doing? z Are you rebelling against the king?” 20[†]Then I replied to
them, a “The God of heaven will make us prosper, and we his servants will
arise and build, but you have no portion or right or claim [1] in Jerusalem.”
Rebuilding the Wall