NEHEMIAH 8 [†]And all the people gathered as one man into the square
before t the Water Gate. And they told u Ezra the scribe to bring the Book of
the Law of Moses that the LORD had commanded Israel. 2[†]So Ezra the
priest v brought the Law before the assembly, both men and women and all
who could understand what they heard, w on the first day of the seventh
month. 3[†] x And he read from it facing the square before the Water Gate
from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women
and those who could understand. And the ears of all the people were
attentive to the Book of the Law.
4And Ezra the scribe stood on a wooden
platform that they had made for the purpose. And beside him stood
Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maaseiah on his right hand,
and Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum, Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and
Meshullam on his left hand. 5And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all
the people, for he was above all the people, and as he opened it all the
people stood. 6And Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God, and all the people
answered, y “Amen, Amen,” z lifting up their hands. a And they bowed their
heads and worshiped the LORD with their faces to the ground. 7[†] b Also
Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah,
Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, the Levites, [1] c helped the people
to understand the Law, d while the people remained in their places. 8They
read from the book, from the Law of God, clearly, [2] and they gave the
sense, so that the people understood the reading.
This Day Is Holy
9[†]And Nehemiah, who was e the governor, and Ezra f the priest and
scribe, and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people, g “This
day is holy to the LORD your God; h do not mourn or weep.” For all the
people wept as they heard the words of the Law.
10Then he said to them,
“Go your way. Eat the fat and drink sweet wine and i send portions to
anyone who has nothing ready, for this day is holy to our Lord. And do not
be grieved, for the joy of the LORD is your strength.” 11So the Levites
calmed all the people, saying, “Be quiet, for this day is holy; do not be
grieved.” 12And all the people went their way to eat and drink and to send
portions and to make great rejoicing, because j they had understood the
words that were declared to them.
Feast of Booths Celebrated
13[†]On the second day the heads of fathers’ houses of all the people, with
the priests and the Levites, came together to Ezra the scribe in order to
study the words of the Law.
14And they found it written in the Law that the
LORD had commanded by Moses k that the people of Israel should dwell in
booths [3] during the feast of the seventh month, 15and that they should
proclaim it and l publish it in all their towns and m in Jerusalem, “Go out to
the hills and bring n branches of olive, wild olive, myrtle, palm, and other
leafy trees to make booths, as it is written.” 16So the people went out and
brought them and made booths for themselves, each o on his roof, and in
their courts and in the courts of the house of God, and in the square at p the
Water Gate and in the square at q the Gate of Ephraim. 17[†]And all the
assembly of those who had returned from the captivity made booths and
lived in the booths, for from the days of Jeshua the son of Nun to that day
r the people of Israel had not done so. And there was s very great rejoicing.
18And day by day, from the first day to the last day, t he read from the Book
of the Law of God. They kept the feast seven days, and u on the eighth day
there was a solemn assembly, according to the rule.
The People of Israel Confess Their Sin