NUMBERS 10 [†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Make two silver
trumpets. Of hammered work you shall make them, and you shall use them
for x summoning the congregation and for breaking camp. 3And when
y both are blown, all the congregation shall gather themselves to you at the
entrance of the tent of meeting. 4But if they blow only one, then z the chiefs,
the heads of the tribes of Israel, shall gather themselves to you. 5When you
blow an alarm, a the camps that are on the east side shall set out. 6And
when you blow an alarm the second time, b the camps that are on the south
side shall set out. An alarm is to be blown whenever they are to set out.
7But when the assembly is to be gathered together, c you shall blow a long
blast, but you shall not d sound an alarm. 8 e And the sons of Aaron, the
priests, shall blow the trumpets. The trumpets shall be to you for a perpetual
statute throughout your generations. 9And f when you go to war in your
land against the adversary who g oppresses you, then you shall d sound an
alarm with the trumpets, that you may be h remembered before the LORD
your God, and you shall be saved from your enemies. 10 i On the day of your
gladness also, and at your appointed feasts and j at the beginnings of your
months, you shall blow the trumpets over your burnt offerings and over the
sacrifices of your peace offerings. They shall be k a reminder of you before
your God: I am the LORD your God.”
Israel Leaves Sinai
11[†]In the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the
month, l the cloud lifted from over the tabernacle of the testimony,
12and the
people of Israel m set out by stages from the n wilderness of Sinai. And the
cloud settled down in the o wilderness of Paran. 13They set out for the first
time p at the command of the LORD by Moses. 14The standard of the camp
of the people of Judah set out q first by their companies, and over their
company was r Nahshon the son of Amminadab. 15And over the company
of the tribe of the people of Issachar was Nethanel the son of Zuar.
16And
over the company of the tribe of the people of Zebulun was Eliab the son of
Helon.
17And when s the tabernacle was taken down, the sons of Gershon and
the sons of Merari, t who carried the tabernacle, set out. 18And u the
standard of the camp of Reuben set out by their companies, and over their
company was v Elizur the son of Shedeur.
19And over the company of the
tribe of the people of Simeon was w Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
20And over the company of the tribe of the people of Gad was x Eliasaph
the son of y Deuel.
21Then the Kohathites set out, z carrying the holy things, and a the
tabernacle was set up before their arrival. 22And b the standard of the camp
of the people of Ephraim set out by their companies, and over their
company was c Elishama the son of Ammihud. 23And over the company of
the tribe of the people of Manasseh was c Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
24And over the company of the tribe of the people of Benjamin was
d Abidan the son of Gideoni.
25Then e the standard of the camp of the people of Dan, acting as the
f rear guard of all the camps, set out by their companies, and over their
company was g Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. 26And over the company
of the tribe of the people of Asher was h Pagiel the son of Ochran. 27And
over the company of the tribe of the people of Naphtali was i Ahira the son
of Enan. 28 j This was the order of march of the people of Israel by their
companies, when they set out.
29[†]And Moses said to Hobab the son of k Reuel the Midianite, Moses’
father-in-law, “We are setting out for the place of which the LORD said, l ‘I
will give it to you.’ Come with us, and we will do good to you, for m the
LORD has promised good to Israel.” 30But he said to him, “I will not go. I
will depart to my own land and to my kindred.” 31And he said, “Please do
not leave us, for you know where we should camp in the wilderness, and
you will serve n as eyes for us. 32And if you do go with us, o whatever good
the LORD will do to us, the same will we do to you.”
33[†]So they set out from p the mount of the LORD three days’ journey.
And the ark of the covenant of the LORD went before them three days’
journey, to seek out q a resting place for them. 34 r And the cloud of the
LORD was over them by day, whenever they set out from the camp.
35And whenever the ark set out, Moses said, s “Arise, O LORD, and let
your enemies be scattered, and let those who hate you flee before you.”
36And when it rested, he said, “Return, O LORD, to the ten thousand
thousands of Israel.”
The People Complain