NUMBERS 15 [†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the people of
Israel and say to them, x When you come into the land you are to inhabit,
which I am giving you, 3and y you offer to the LORD from the herd or from
the flock a food offering [1] or a burnt offering or a sacrifice, z to fulfill a
vow or as a freewill offering or a at your appointed feasts, to make a
b pleasing aroma to the LORD,
4then c he who brings his offering shall offer
to the LORD d a grain offering of a tenth of an ephah [2] of fine flour, e mixed
with a quarter of a hin [3] of oil; 5and you shall offer with the burnt offering,
or for the sacrifice, a quarter of a hin of f wine for the drink offering for
each lamb. 6 g Or for a ram, you shall offer for a grain offering two tenths of
an ephah of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of oil. 7And for the drink
offering you shall offer a third of a hin of wine, a b pleasing aroma to the
LORD.
8And when you offer a bull as a burnt offering or sacrifice, to z fulfill
a vow or for h peace offerings to the LORD,
9then one shall offer i with the
bull a grain offering of three tenths of an ephah of fine flour, mixed with
half a hin of oil. 10And you shall offer for the drink offering half a hin of
wine, as a food offering, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
11 j “Thus it shall be done for each bull or ram, or for each lamb or young
goat. 12As many as you offer, so shall you do with each one, as many as
there are. 13Every native Israelite shall do these things in this way, in
offering a food offering, with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
14And if a
stranger is sojourning with you, or anyone is living permanently among
you, and he wishes to offer a food offering, with a pleasing aroma to the
LORD, he shall do as you do. 15For the assembly, k there shall be one statute
for you and for the stranger who sojourns with you, a statute forever
throughout your generations. You and the sojourner shall be alike before the
LORD.
16One law and one rule shall be for you and for the stranger who
sojourns with you.”
17[†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 18 l “Speak to the people of Israel
and say to them, When you come into the land to which I bring you 19and
when you eat of m the bread of the land, you shall present a contribution to
the LORD.
20 n Of the first of your dough you shall present a loaf as a
contribution; like a o contribution from the threshing floor, so shall you
present it. 21
n Some of the first of your dough you shall give to the LORD as
a contribution throughout your generations.
Laws About Unintentional Sins
22[†] p “But if you sin unintentionally, [4] and do not observe all these
commandments that the LORD has spoken to Moses, 23all that the LORD has
commanded you by Moses, from the day that the LORD gave
commandment, and onward throughout your generations, 24then if it was
done unintentionally q without the knowledge of the congregation, all the
congregation shall offer one bull from the herd for a burnt offering, a
pleasing aroma to the LORD, r with its grain offering and its drink offering,
according to the rule, and s one male goat for a sin offering. 25 t And the
priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the people of Israel,
and they shall be forgiven, because it was a mistake, and they have brought
their offering, a food offering to the LORD, and their sin offering before the
LORD for their mistake. 26And all the congregation of the people of Israel
shall be forgiven, and the stranger who sojourns among them, because the
whole population was involved in the mistake.
27[†] u “If one person sins unintentionally, he shall offer a female goat a
year old for a sin offering. 28 v And the priest shall make atonement before
the LORD for the person who makes a mistake, when he sins unintentionally,
to make atonement for him, and he shall be forgiven. 29 w You shall have
one law for him who does anything unintentionally, for him who is native
among the people of Israel and for the stranger who sojourns among them.
30[†] x But the person who does anything with a high hand, whether he is
native or a sojourner, reviles the LORD, and that person shall be cut off from
among his people. 31Because he has y despised the word of the LORD and
has broken his commandment, that person shall be utterly cut off; his
iniquity shall be on him.”
A Sabbathbreaker Executed
32[†]While the people of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man
z gathering sticks on the Sabbath day.
33And those who found him gathering
sticks brought him to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation.
34 a They put him in custody, because it had not been made clear what
should be done to him. 35And the LORD said to Moses, b “The man shall be
put to death; all the congregation shall c stone him with stones outside the
camp.” 36And all the congregation brought him outside the camp and stoned
him to death with stones, as the LORD commanded Moses.
Tassels on Garments
37The LORD said to Moses, 38“Speak to the people of Israel, and tell them to
d make tassels on the corners of their garments throughout their generations,
and to put a cord of blue on the tassel of each corner.
39And it shall be a
tassel for you to look at and remember all the commandments of the LORD,
to do them, e not to follow [5] after your own heart and your own eyes,
which you are inclined f to whore after.
40So you shall remember and do all
my commandments, and be g holy to your God. 41 h I am the LORD your
God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God: I am the
LORD your God.”
Korah’s Rebellion