NUMBERS 21 [†]When w the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who lived in x the
Negeb, heard that Israel was coming by the way of Atharim, he fought
against Israel, and took some of them captive. 2[†] y And Israel vowed a
vow to the LORD and said, “If you will indeed give this people into my
hand, then I will devote their cities to destruction.” [1] 3And the LORD
heeded the voice of Israel and gave over the Canaanites, and they devoted
them and their cities to destruction. So the name of the place was called
z Hormah. [2]
The Bronze Serpent
4[†]From Mount Hor a they set out by the way to the Red Sea, b to go
around the land of Edom. And the people became impatient on the way.
5And the people c spoke against God and against Moses, d “Why have you
brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no food
and no water, and e we loathe this worthless food.” 6 f Then the LORD sent
fiery serpents among the people, and g they bit the people, so that many
people of Israel died. 7 h And the people came to Moses and said, “We have
sinned, for we have spoken against the LORD and against you. i Pray to the
LORD, that he take away the serpents from us.” So Moses prayed for the
people. 8And the LORD said to Moses, “Make a fiery serpent and set it on a
pole, and everyone who is bitten, when he sees it, shall live.” 9[†]So
j Moses made a bronze [3] serpent and set it on a pole. And if a serpent bit
anyone, he would look at the bronze serpent and live.
The Song of the Well
10[†]And the people of Israel set out and k camped in Oboth. 11 k And they
set out from Oboth and k camped at Iye-abarim, in the wilderness that is
opposite Moab, toward the sunrise. 12From there they set out and camped in
l the Valley of Zered. 13From there they set out and camped on the other
side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness that extends from the border of
the Amorites, for the m Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the
Amorites. 14[†]Therefore it is said in the Book of the Wars of the LORD,
“Waheb in Suphah, and the valleys of the Arnon,
15 and the slope of the valleys
that extends to the seat of n Ar,
and leans to the border of Moab.”
16[†]And from there they continued o to Beer; [4] that is the well of which
the LORD said to Moses, “Gather the people together, so that p I may give
them water.” 17Then Israel sang this song:
“Spring up, O well!—Sing to it!—
18 the well that the princes made,
that the nobles of the people dug,
with q the scepter and with their staffs.”
And from the wilderness they went on to Mattanah, 19and from Mattanah to
Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth, 20and from Bamoth to the valley
lying in the region of Moab by the top of Pisgah r that looks down on the
desert. [5]
King Sihon Defeated
21[†]Then s Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,
22
t “Let me pass through your land. We will not turn aside into field or
vineyard. We will not drink the water of a well. We will go by the King’s
Highway until we have passed through your territory.” 23 u But Sihon would
not allow Israel to pass through his territory. He gathered all his people
together and went out against Israel to the wilderness and v came to Jahaz
and fought against Israel. 24
w And Israel defeated him with the edge of the
sword and took possession of his land from the Arnon to the x Jabbok, as far
as to the Ammonites, for the border of the Ammonites was strong. 25And
Israel took all these cities, and Israel settled in all the cities of the Amorites,
in Heshbon, and in all its villages. 26For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the
king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab and
taken all his land out of his hand, as far as the Arnon. 27[†]Therefore the
y ballad singers say,
“Come to z Heshbon, let it be built;
let the city of Sihon be established.
28 For a fire came out from z Heshbon,
flame from the city of Sihon.
It devoured n Ar of Moab,
and swallowed [6] the heights of the Arnon.
29[†] a Woe to you, O Moab!
You are undone, O people of b Chemosh!
He has made his sons fugitives,
and his daughters captives,
to an Amorite king, Sihon.
30 So we overthrew them;
Heshbon, as far as c Dibon, perished;
and we laid waste as far as Nophah;
fire spread as far as d Medeba.” [7]
King Og Defeated
31[†]Thus Israel lived in the land of the Amorites. 32And Moses sent to spy
out e Jazer, and they captured its villages and dispossessed the Amorites
who were there. 33Then they turned and went up by the way to Bashan. And
Og the king of Bashan came out against them, he and all his people, to
battle f at Edrei. 34
g But the LORD said to Moses, “Do not fear him, for I
have given him into your hand, and all his people, and his land. And h you
shall do to him as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived at
Heshbon.” 35So they defeated him and his sons and all his people, until he
had no survivor left. And they possessed his land.
Balak Summons Balaam