NUMBERS 24 [†]When Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel,
he did not go, as at s other times, to look for omens, but set his face toward
the wilderness. 2And Balaam lifted up his eyes and saw Israel t camping
tribe by tribe. And u the Spirit of God came upon him, 3and he v took up his
discourse and said,
“The oracle of Balaam the son of Beor,
the oracle of the man whose eye is opened, [1]
4 the oracle of him who hears the words of God,
who sees the vision of the Almighty,
w falling down with his eyes uncovered:
5[†] How lovely are your tents, O Jacob,
your encampments, O Israel!
6 Like palm groves [2] that stretch afar,
like gardens beside a river,
x like aloes y that the LORD has planted,
like cedar trees beside the waters.
7[†] Water shall flow from his buckets,
and his seed shall be z in many waters;
his king shall be higher than a Agag,
and b his kingdom shall be exalted.
8 God brings him out of Egypt
and is for him like the c horns of the wild ox;
he shall d eat up the nations, his adversaries,
and shall e break their bones in pieces
and f pierce them through with his arrows.
9[†] He crouched, he lay down like a lion
and g like a lioness; who will rouse him up?
h Blessed are those who bless you,
and cursed are those who curse you.”
10And Balak’s anger was kindled against Balaam, and he i struck his
hands together. And Balak said to Balaam, j “I called you to curse my
enemies, and behold, you have blessed them these three times. 11Therefore
now flee to your own place. I said, k ‘I will certainly honor you,’ but the
LORD has held you back from honor.” 12And Balaam said to Balak, “Did I
not tell your messengers whom you sent to me, 13
l ‘If Balak should give me
his house full of silver and gold, I would not be able to go beyond the word
of the LORD, to do either good or bad m of my own will. What the LORD
speaks, that will I speak’? 14And now, behold, I am going to my people.
Come, n I will let you know what this people will do to your people o in the
latter days.”
Balaam’s Final Oracle
15[†] p And he took up his discourse and said,
“The oracle of Balaam the son of Beor,
the oracle of the man whose eye is opened,
16 the oracle of him who hears the words of God,
and knows the knowledge of q the Most High,
who sees the vision of the Almighty,
r falling down with his eyes uncovered:
17[†] s I see him, but not now;
I behold him, but not near:
t a star shall come out of Jacob,
and u a scepter shall rise out of Israel;
it shall v crush the forehead [3] of Moab
and break down all the sons of Sheth.
18[†] w Edom shall be dispossessed;
x Seir also, his enemies, shall be dispossessed.
Israel is doing valiantly.
19[†] And one from Jacob shall exercise dominion
and destroy the survivors of cities!”
20[†]Then he looked on Amalek and y took up his discourse and said,
“Amalek was the first among the nations,
z but its end is utter destruction.”
21[†]And he looked on the Kenite, and took up his discourse and said,
“Enduring is your dwelling place,
and your nest is set in the rock.
22 Nevertheless, Kain shall be burned
when Asshur takes you away captive.”
23[†]And he took up his discourse and said,
“Alas, who shall live when God does this?
24 But ships shall come from a Kittim
and shall afflict Asshur and b Eber;
and he too c shall come to utter destruction.”
25[†]Then Balaam rose and d went back to his place. And Balak also went
his way.
Baal Worship at Peor