NUMBERS 18 [†]So the LORD said to Aaron, “You and your sons and your
father’s house with you shall q bear iniquity connected with the sanctuary,
r and you and your sons with you shall bear iniquity connected with your
priesthood. 2And with you bring your brothers also, the tribe of Levi, the
tribe of your father, that they may s join you and t minister to you while you
and your sons with you are before the tent of the testimony.
3They shall
keep guard over you and u over the whole tent, v but shall not come near to
the vessels of the sanctuary or to the altar w lest they, and you, die. 4They
shall join you and keep guard over the tent of meeting for all the service of
the tent, x and no outsider shall come near you. 5And you shall y keep guard
over the sanctuary and over the altar, z that there may never again be wrath
on the people of Israel. 6
a And behold, I have taken your brothers the
Levites from among the people of Israel. b They are a gift to you, given to
the LORD, to do the service of the tent of meeting. 7And c you and your sons
with you shall guard your priesthood for all that concerns the altar and
d that is within the veil; and you shall serve. I give your priesthood as a
gift, [1] and e any outsider who comes near shall be put to death.”
8[†]Then the LORD spoke to Aaron, “Behold, f I have given you charge of
the contributions made to me, all the consecrated things of the people of
Israel. I have given them to you g as a portion and to your sons as a
perpetual due. 9This shall be yours of the most holy things, reserved from
the fire: every offering of theirs, every grain offering of theirs and every
h sin offering of theirs and every i guilt offering of theirs, which they render
to me, shall be most holy to you and to your sons. 10In a most holy place
shall you eat it. Every male may eat it; it is holy to you. 11This also is yours:
the contribution of their gift, all the j wave offerings of the people of Israel.
I have given them to k you, and to your sons and daughters with you, as a
perpetual due. l Everyone who is clean in your house may eat it. 12 m All the
best of the oil and all the best of the wine and of the grain, n the firstfruits of
what they give to the LORD, I give to you. 13The first ripe fruits of all that is
in their land, o which they bring to the LORD, shall be yours. l Everyone
who is clean in your house may eat it. 14 p Every devoted thing in Israel
shall be yours. 15
q Everything that opens the womb of all flesh, whether
man or beast, which they offer to the LORD, shall be yours. Nevertheless,
r the firstborn of man you shall redeem, and the firstborn of unclean
animals you shall redeem. 16And their redemption price s (at a month old
you shall redeem them) you shall fix at five shekels [2] in silver, according
to the shekel of the sanctuary, t which is twenty gerahs. 17 u But the firstborn
of a cow, or the firstborn of a sheep, or the firstborn of a goat, you shall not
redeem; they are holy. You shall sprinkle their blood on the altar and shall
burn their fat as a food offering, with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
18But
their flesh shall be yours, as v the breast that is waved and as the right thigh
are yours. 19[†] w All the holy contributions that the people of Israel present
to the LORD I give to you, and to your sons and daughters with you, as a
perpetual due. x It is a covenant of salt forever before the LORD for you and
for your offspring with you.” 20And the LORD said to Aaron, “You shall
have no inheritance in their land, neither shall you have any portion among
them. y I am your portion and your inheritance among the people of Israel.
21[†] z “To the Levites I have given every tithe in Israel for an inheritance,
in return for their service that they do, their service in the tent of meeting,
22
a so that the people of Israel do not come near the tent of meeting, b lest
they bear sin and die. 23But c the Levites shall do the service of the tent of
meeting, d and they shall bear their iniquity. It shall be a perpetual statute
throughout your generations, and among the people of Israel they shall have
no inheritance. 24For the tithe of the people of Israel, which e they present
as a contribution to the LORD, I have given to the Levites for an inheritance.
Therefore I have said of them that they shall have no inheritance f among
the people of Israel.”
25[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 26“Moreover, you shall speak
and say to the Levites, ‘When you take from the people of Israel the tithe
that I have given you from them for your inheritance, then you shall present
a contribution from it to the LORD, g a tithe of the tithe. 27 h And your
contribution shall be counted to you as though it were the grain of the
threshing floor, and as the fullness of the winepress. 28So you shall also
present a contribution to the LORD from all your tithes, which you receive
from the people of Israel. And from it you shall give the LORD’s
contribution to Aaron the priest. 29Out of all the gifts to you, you shall
present every contribution due to the LORD; from each its best part is to be
dedicated.’ 30Therefore you shall say to them, ‘When you have offered from
it the best of it, i then the rest shall be counted to the Levites as produce of
the threshing floor, and as produce of the winepress. 31And you may eat it
in any place, you and your households, for it is j your reward in return for
your service in the tent of meeting. 32And you shall k bear no sin by reason
of it, when you have contributed the best of it. But you shall not l profane
the holy things of the people of Israel, lest you die.’”
Laws for Purification