NUMBERS 11 [†]And t the people complained in the hearing of the LORD
about their misfortunes, and when the LORD heard it, u his anger was
kindled, and v the fire of the LORD burned among them and consumed some
outlying parts of the camp. 2Then w the people cried out to Moses, x and
Moses prayed to the LORD, and the fire died down. 3So the name of that
place was called y Taberah, [1] because the fire of the LORD burned among
them.
4[†]Now the z rabble that was among them had a strong craving. And the
people of Israel also a wept again and said, b “Oh that we had meat to eat!
5 c We remember the fish we ate in Egypt that cost nothing, the cucumbers,
the melons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic. 6But now our strength is
dried up, and there is nothing at all but this manna to look at.”
7[†]Now d the manna was like coriander seed, and its appearance like that
of bdellium. 8 e The people went about and gathered it and ground it in
handmills or beat it in mortars and boiled it in pots and made cakes of it.
f And the taste of it was like the taste of cakes baked with oil. 9 g When the
dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell with it.
10Moses heard the people h weeping throughout their clans, everyone at
the door of his tent. And the anger of the LORD blazed hotly, and Moses was
displeased. 11 i Moses said to the LORD, “Why have you dealt ill with your
servant? And why have I not found favor in your sight, that you lay the
burden of all this people on me? 12Did I conceive all this people? Did I give
them birth, that you should say to me, j ‘Carry them in your bosom, as a
k nurse carries a nursing child,’ to the land l that you swore to give their
fathers? 13 m Where am I to get meat to give to all this people? For they
weep before me and say, ‘Give us meat, that we may eat.’ 14
n I am not able
to carry all this people alone; the burden is too heavy for me. 15If you will
treat me like this, kill me at once, if I find favor in your sight, that I may not
see my wretchedness.”
Elders Appointed to Aid Moses
16[†]Then the LORD said to Moses, “Gather for me o seventy men of the
elders of Israel, whom you know to be the elders of the people and
p officers over them, and bring them to the tent of meeting, and let them
take their stand there with you. 17
q And I will come down and talk with you
there. And r I will take some of the Spirit that is on you and put it on them,
and s they shall bear the burden of the people with you, so that you may not
bear it yourself alone. 18And say to the people, t ‘Consecrate yourselves for
tomorrow, and you shall eat meat, for you have wept in the hearing of the
LORD, saying, “Who will give us meat to eat? u For it was better for us in
Egypt.” Therefore the LORD will give you meat, and you shall eat. 19You
shall not eat just one day, or two days, or five days, or ten days, or twenty
days, 20but a whole month, v until it comes out at your nostrils and becomes
loathsome to you, because you have rejected the LORD who is among you
and have wept before him, saying, w “Why did we come out of Egypt?”’”
21But Moses said, x “The people among whom I am number six hundred
thousand on foot, and you have said, ‘I will give them meat, that they may
eat a whole month!’ 22
y Shall flocks and herds be slaughtered for them, and
be enough for them? Or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for
them, and be enough for them?” 23And the LORD said to Moses, z “Is the
LORD’s hand shortened? Now you shall see whether a my word will come
true for you or not.”
24[†]So Moses went out and told the people the words of the LORD. b And
he gathered seventy men of the elders of the people and placed them around
the tent. 25Then c the LORD came down in the cloud and spoke to him, and
took some of the Spirit that was on him and put it on the seventy elders.
And as soon as the Spirit rested on them, they prophesied. But they did not
continue doing it.
26Now two men remained in the camp, one named Eldad, and the other
named Medad, and the Spirit rested on them. They were among those
registered, but they d had not gone out to the tent, and so they prophesied in
the camp. 27And a young man ran and told Moses, “Eldad and Medad are
prophesying in the camp.” 28And e Joshua the son of Nun, the assistant of
Moses from his youth, said, “My lord Moses, f stop them.” 29But Moses
said to him, “Are you jealous for my sake? g Would that all the LORD’s
people were prophets, that the LORD would put his Spirit on them!” 30And
Moses and the elders of Israel returned to the camp.
Quail and a Plague
31[†]Then a h wind from the LORD sprang up, and it brought quail from the
sea and let them fall beside the camp, about a day’s journey on this side and
a day’s journey on the other side, around the camp, and about two cubits [2]
above the ground. 32And the people rose all that day and all night and all
the next day, and gathered the quail. Those who gathered least gathered ten
i homers. [3] And they spread them out for themselves all around the camp.
33 j While the meat was yet between their teeth, before it was consumed, the
anger of the LORD was kindled against the people, and k the LORD struck
down the people with a very great plague. 34Therefore the name of that
place was called l Kibroth-hattaavah, [4] because there they buried the
people who had the craving. 35 m From Kibroth-hattaavah the people
journeyed to n Hazeroth, and they remained at n Hazeroth.
Miriam and Aaron Oppose Moses