NUMBERS 25 [†]While Israel lived in e Shittim, f the people began to whore
with the daughters of Moab. 2 g These invited the people to the sacrifices of
their gods, and the people ate and bowed down to their gods. 3[†]So Israel
yoked himself to Baal of Peor. And the anger of the LORD was kindled
against Israel. 4[†]And the LORD said to Moses, h “Take all the chiefs of the
people and i hang [1] them in the sun before the LORD, j that the fierce anger
of the LORD may turn away from Israel.” 5And Moses said to k the judges of
Israel, l “Each of you kill those of his men who have yoked themselves to
Baal of Peor.”
6[†]And behold, one of the people of Israel came and brought a Midianite
woman to his family, in the sight of Moses and in the sight of the whole
congregation of the people of Israel, while they were m weeping in the
entrance of the tent of meeting. 7[†] n When Phinehas o the son of Eleazar,
son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose and left the congregation and took a
spear in his hand 8and went after the man of Israel into the chamber and
pierced both of them, the man of Israel and the woman through her belly.
Thus the plague on the people of Israel was stopped. 9[†]Nevertheless,
p those who died by the plague were twenty-four thousand.
The Zeal of Phinehas
10And the LORD said to Moses, 11“Phinehas the son of Eleazar, son of Aaron
the priest, has turned back my wrath from the people of Israel, in that he
q was jealous with my jealousy among them, so that I did not consume the
people of Israel in r my jealousy.
12Therefore say, s ‘Behold, I give to him
my covenant of peace, 13and it shall be to him and to t his descendants after
him the covenant of u a perpetual priesthood, because he was jealous for his
God and made atonement for the people of Israel.’”
14The name of the slain man of Israel, who was killed with the Midianite
woman, was Zimri the son of Salu, chief of a father’s house belonging to
the Simeonites. 15And the name of the Midianite woman who was killed
was Cozbi the daughter of v Zur, who was the tribal head of a father’s house
in Midian.
16[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 17 w “Harass the Midianites
and strike them down, 18for they have harassed you with their x wiles, with
which they beguiled you in the matter of y Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi,
the daughter of the chief of Midian, their sister, who was killed on the day
of the plague on account of Peor.”
Census of the New Generation