NUMBERS 22 [†]Then i the people of Israel set out and camped in the plains
of Moab beyond the Jordan at Jericho. 2And j Balak the son of Zippor saw
all that Israel had done to the Amorites. 3And k Moab was in great dread of
the people, because they were many. Moab was overcome with fear of the
people of Israel. 4And Moab said to l the elders of Midian, “This horde will
now lick up all that is around us, as the ox licks up the grass of the field.”
So Balak the son of Zippor, who was king of Moab at that time, 5 m sent
messengers to Balaam the son of Beor n at Pethor, which is near the River
in the land of the people of Amaw, [1] to call him, saying, “Behold, a people
has come out of Egypt. They cover the face of the earth, and they are
dwelling opposite me. 6 o Come now, curse this people for me, since they
are too mighty for me. Perhaps I shall be able to defeat them and drive them
from the land, for I know that he whom you bless is blessed, and he whom
you curse is cursed.”
7[†]So the elders of Moab and l the elders of Midian departed with p the
fees for divination in their hand. And they came to Balaam and gave him
Balak’s message. 8And he said to them, “Lodge here tonight, and I will
bring back word to you, as the LORD speaks to me.” So the princes of Moab
stayed with Balaam. 9 q And God came to Balaam and said, “Who are these
men with you?” 10And Balaam said to God, “Balak the son of Zippor, king
of Moab, has sent to me, saying, 11‘Behold, a people has come out of Egypt,
and it covers the face of the earth. Now come, curse them for me. Perhaps I
shall be able to fight against them and drive them out.’” 12God said to
Balaam, “You shall not go with them. You shall not curse the people, for
r they are blessed.” 13So Balaam rose in the morning and said to the princes
of Balak, “Go to your own land, for the LORD has refused to let me go with
you.” 14So the princes of Moab rose and went to Balak and said, “Balaam
refuses to come with us.”
15[†]Once again Balak sent princes, more in number and more honorable
than these. 16And they came to Balaam and said to him, “Thus says Balak
the son of Zippor: ‘Let nothing hinder you from coming to me, 17 s for I will
surely do you great honor, and whatever you say to me I will do. t Come,
curse this people for me.’” 18But Balaam answered and said to the servants
of Balak, u “Though Balak were to give me his house full of silver and
gold, v I could not go beyond the command of the LORD my God to do less
or more. 19[†]So you, too, w please stay here tonight, that I may know what
more the LORD will say to me.” 20 q And God came to Balaam at night and
said to him, “If the men have come to call you, rise, go with them; x but
only do what I tell you.” 21So Balaam rose in the morning and saddled his
donkey and went with the princes of Moab.
Balaam’s Donkey and the Angel
22[†]But God’s anger was kindled because he went, y and the angel of the
LORD took his stand in the way z as his adversary. Now he was riding on the
donkey, and his two servants were with him. 23And the donkey saw the
angel of the LORD standing in the road, with a drawn sword in his hand.
And the donkey turned aside out of the road and went into the field. And
Balaam struck the donkey, to turn her into the road. 24Then the angel of the
LORD stood in a narrow path between the vineyards, with a wall on either
side. 25And when the donkey saw the angel of the LORD, she pushed against
the wall and pressed Balaam’s foot against the wall. So he struck her again.
26Then the angel of the LORD went ahead and stood in a narrow place,
where there was no way to turn either to the right or to the left. 27When the
donkey saw the angel of the LORD, she lay down under Balaam. And
Balaam’s anger was kindled, and he struck the donkey with his staff. 28Then
the LORD a opened the mouth of the donkey, and she said to Balaam, “What
have I done to you, that you have struck me these three times?” 29And
Balaam said to the donkey, “Because you have made a fool of me. I wish I
had a sword in my hand, for then I would kill you.” 30And the donkey said
to Balaam, “Am I not your donkey, on which you have ridden all your life
long to this day? Is it my habit to treat you this way?” And he said, “No.”
31Then the LORD b opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of
the LORD standing in the way, with his drawn sword in his hand. And he
bowed down and fell on his face. 32And the angel of the LORD said to him,
“Why have you struck your donkey these three times? Behold, I have come
out c to oppose you because your way is perverse [2] before me. 33The
donkey saw me and turned aside before me these three times. If she had not
turned aside from me, surely just now I would have killed you and let her
live.” 34[†]Then Balaam said to the angel of the LORD, d “I have sinned, for
I did not know that you stood in the road against me. Now therefore, if it is
evil in your sight, I will turn back.” 35And the angel of the LORD said to
Balaam, “Go with the men, e but speak only the word that I tell you.” So
Balaam went on with the princes of Balak.
36[†]When Balak heard that Balaam had come, he went out to meet him
at the city of Moab, f on the border formed by the Arnon, at the extremity of
the border.
37And Balak said to Balaam, “Did I not send to you to call you?
Why did you not come to me? Am I not able to g honor you?” 38Balaam
said to Balak, “Behold, I have come to you! Have I now any power of my
own to speak anything? h The word that God puts in my mouth, that must I
speak.” 39[†]Then Balaam went with Balak, and they came to Kiriath-
huzoth. 40And Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep, and sent for Balaam and for
the princes who were with him.
41[†]And in the morning Balak took Balaam and brought him up to
Bamoth-baal, and from there he saw a fraction of the people.
Balaam’s First Oracle
NUMBERS 23 And Balaam said to Balak, i “Build for me here seven altars,
and prepare for me here seven bulls and seven rams.” 2Balak did as Balaam
had said. And Balak and Balaam j offered on each altar a bull and a ram.
3And Balaam said to Balak, k “Stand beside your burnt offering, and I will
go. Perhaps the LORD will come l to meet me, and whatever he shows me I
will tell you.” And he went to a bare height, 4
m and God met Balaam. And
Balaam said to him, “I have arranged the seven altars and I have offered on
each altar a bull and a ram.” 5And the LORD n put a word in Balaam’s mouth
and said, “Return to Balak, and thus you shall speak.” 6And he returned to
him, and behold, he and all the princes of Moab were standing beside his
burnt offering. 7And Balaam o took up his discourse and said,
“From p Aram Balak has brought me,
the king of Moab q from the eastern mountains:
‘Come, r curse Jacob for me,
and come, denounce Israel!’
8 How can I curse whom God has not cursed?
How can I denounce whom the LORD has not denounced?
9[†] For from the top of the crags s I see him,
from the hills I behold him;
behold, t a people dwelling alone,
and u not counting itself among the nations!
10[†] v Who can count the dust of Jacob
or number the fourth part [1] of Israel?
Let me die w the death of the upright,
and let my end be like his!”
11And Balak said to Balaam, “What have you done to me? x I took you to
curse my enemies, and behold, you have done nothing but bless them.”
12And he answered and said, y “Must I not take care to speak what the LORD
puts in my mouth?”
Balaam’s Second Oracle
13[†]And Balak said to him, “Please come with me to another place, from
which you may see them. You shall see only a fraction of them and shall not
see them all. Then curse them for me from there.” 14And he took him to the
field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, z and built seven altars and offered a
bull and a ram on each altar.
15Balaam said to Balak, a “Stand here beside
your burnt offering, while I meet the LORD over there.” 16And the LORD met
Balaam and b put a word in his mouth and said, “Return to Balak, and thus
shall you speak.” 17And he came to him, and behold, he was standing
beside his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said
to him, “What has the LORD spoken?” 18And Balaam took up his discourse
and said,
“Rise, Balak, and hear;
give ear to me, O son of Zippor:
19[†] c God is not man, that he should lie,
or a son of man, that he should change his mind.
Has he said, and will he not do it?
Or has he spoken, and will he not fulfill it?
20 Behold, I received a command to bless:
d he has blessed, and e I cannot revoke it.
21[†] f He has not beheld misfortune in Jacob,
nor has he seen trouble in Israel.
The LORD their God is with them,
and the shout of a king is among them.
22
g God brings them out of Egypt
and is for them like h the horns of the wild ox.
23[†] For there is no enchantment against Jacob,
no i divination against Israel;
now it shall be said of Jacob and Israel,
j ‘What has God wrought!’
24[†] Behold, a people! k As a lioness it rises up
and as a lion it lifts itself;
l it does not lie down until it has devoured the prey
and drunk the blood of the slain.”
25And Balak said to Balaam, “Do not curse them at all, and do not bless
them at all.” 26But Balaam answered Balak, “Did I not tell you, m ‘All that
the LORD says, that I must do’?” 27And Balak said to Balaam, n “Come
now, I will take you to another place. Perhaps it will please God that you
may curse them for me from there.” 28So Balak took Balaam to the top of
o Peor, which overlooks p the desert. [2] 29And Balaam said to Balak,
q “Build for me here seven altars and prepare for me here seven bulls and
seven rams.” 30 r And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bull and a
ram on each altar.
Balaam’s Third Oracle