NUMBERS 9 [†]And the LORD spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, d in
the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of
Egypt, saying, 2“Let the people of Israel keep the Passover at its appointed
time. 3 e On the fourteenth day of this month, at twilight, you shall keep it at
its appointed time; according to all its statutes and all its rules you shall
keep it.” 4So Moses told the people of Israel that they should keep the
Passover.
5And they kept the Passover in the first month, on the fourteenth
day of the month, at twilight, in the wilderness of Sinai; according to all
that the LORD commanded Moses, so the people of Israel did. 6[†]And there
were certain men who were f unclean through touching a dead body, so that
they could not keep the Passover on that day, and g they came before Moses
and Aaron on that day.
7And those men said to him, “We are unclean
through touching a dead body. Why are we kept from bringing the LORD’s
h offering at its appointed time among the people of Israel?” 8And Moses
said to them, “Wait, that i I may hear what the LORD will command
concerning you.”
9The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 10“Speak to the people of Israel,
saying, If any one of you or of your descendants is unclean through
touching a dead body, or is on a long journey, he shall still keep the
Passover to the LORD.
11 j In the second month on the fourteenth day at
twilight they shall keep it. k They shall eat it with unleavened bread and
bitter herbs. 12 l They shall leave none of it until the morning, m nor break
any of its bones; n according to all the statute for the Passover they shall
keep it. 13But if anyone who is clean and is not on a journey fails to keep
the Passover, o that person shall be cut off from his people because he did
not bring the LORD’s p offering at its appointed time; that man shall bear his
sin. 14And if a stranger sojourns among you and would keep the Passover to
the LORD, according to the statute of the Passover and according to its rule,
so shall he do. q You shall have one statute, both for the sojourner and for
the native.”
The Cloud Covering the Tabernacle
15[†] r On the day that the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the
tabernacle, the tent of the testimony. And s at evening it was over the
tabernacle like the appearance of fire until morning. 16So it was always: the
cloud covered it by day [1] and the appearance of fire by night. 17And
whenever the cloud t lifted from over the tent, after that the people of Israel
set out, and in the place where the cloud settled down, there the people of
Israel camped. 18At the command of the LORD the people of Israel set out,
and at the command of the LORD they camped. u As long as the cloud rested
over the tabernacle, they remained in camp. 19Even when the cloud
continued over the tabernacle many days, the people of Israel v kept the
charge of the LORD and did not set out. 20Sometimes the cloud was a few
days over the tabernacle, and according to the command of the LORD they
remained in camp; then according to the command of the LORD they set out.
21And sometimes the cloud remained from evening until morning. And
when the cloud lifted in the morning, they set out, or if it continued for a
day and a night, when the cloud lifted they set out. 22Whether it was two
days, or a month, or a longer time, that the cloud continued over the
tabernacle, abiding there, the people of Israel w remained in camp and did
not set out, but when it lifted they set out. 23At the command of the LORD
they camped, and at the command of the LORD they set out. v They kept the
charge of the LORD, at the command of the LORD by Moses.
The Silver Trumpets