NUMBERS 35 [†]The LORD spoke to Moses in s the plains of Moab by the
Jordan at Jericho, saying, 2 t “Command the people of Israel to give to the
Levites some of the inheritance of their possession as cities for them to
dwell in. And you shall give to the Levites pasturelands around the cities.
3The cities shall be theirs to dwell in, and their pasturelands shall be for
their cattle and for their livestock and for all their beasts. 4The pasturelands
of the cities, which you shall give to the Levites, shall reach from the wall
of the city outward a thousand cubits [1] all around. 5And you shall measure,
outside the city, on the east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side
two thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the
north side two thousand cubits, the city being in the middle. This shall
belong to them as pastureland for their cities.
6“The cities that you give to the Levites shall be u the six cities of refuge,
where you shall permit the manslayer to flee, and in addition to them you
shall give forty-two cities. 7All the cities that you give to the Levites shall
be v forty-eight, with their pasturelands. 8And as for the cities that you shall
give w from the possession of the people of Israel, x from the larger tribes
you shall take many, and from the smaller tribes you shall take few; each, in
proportion to the inheritance that it inherits, shall give of its cities to the
Levites.”
Cities of Refuge
9[†]And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 10“Speak to the people of Israel
and say to them, y When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
11
z then you shall select cities to be cities of refuge for you, that the
manslayer who kills any person without intent may flee there. 12The cities
shall be for you a refuge from the avenger, that the manslayer may not die
until he stands before the congregation for judgment. 13And the cities that
you give shall be your a six cities of refuge. 14
b You shall give three cities
beyond the Jordan, and three cities in the land of Canaan, to be cities of
refuge. 15These six cities shall be for refuge for the people of Israel, and
c for the stranger and for the sojourner among them, that anyone who kills
any person without intent may flee there.
16[†] d “But if he struck him down with an iron object, so that he died, he
is a murderer. The murderer shall be put to death. 17And if he struck him
down with a stone tool that could cause death, and he died, he is a murderer.
The murderer shall be put to death. 18Or if he struck him down with a
wooden tool that could cause death, and he died, he is a murderer. The
murderer shall be put to death. 19 e The avenger of blood shall himself put
the murderer to death; when he meets him, he shall put him to death. 20And
if he pushed him out of hatred or hurled something at him, f lying in wait,
so that he died, 21or in enmity struck him down with his hand, so that he
died, then he who struck the blow shall be put to death. He is a murderer.
e The avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death when he meets him.
22[†]“But if he pushed him suddenly without enmity, or hurled anything
on him g without lying in wait 23or used a stone that could cause death, and
without seeing him dropped it on him, so that he died, though he was not
his enemy and did not seek his harm, 24then h the congregation shall judge
between the manslayer and e the avenger of blood, in accordance with these
rules. 25And the congregation shall rescue the manslayer from the hand of
the avenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to his city of
refuge to which he had fled, and he shall live in it i until the death of the
high priest j who was anointed with the holy oil. 26But if the manslayer
shall at any time go beyond the boundaries of his city of refuge to which he
fled, 27and e the avenger of blood finds him outside the boundaries of his
city of refuge, and the avenger of blood kills the manslayer, he shall not be
guilty of blood. 28For he must remain in his city of refuge i until the death
of the high priest, but after the death of the high priest the manslayer may
return to the land of his possession. 29And these things shall be for k a
statute and rule for you throughout your generations in all your dwelling
places.
30[†]“If anyone kills a person, the murderer shall be put to death on the
l evidence of witnesses. But no person shall be put to death on the
testimony of one witness. 31Moreover, you shall accept no ransom for the
life of a murderer, who is guilty of death, but he shall be put to death. 32And
you shall accept no ransom for him who has fled to his city of refuge, that
he may return to dwell in the land before the death of the high priest. 33You
shall not m pollute the land in which you live, for blood m pollutes the land,
and no atonement can be made for the land for the blood that is shed in it,
except n by the blood of the one who shed it. 34
o You shall not defile the
land in which you live, in the midst of which I dwell, p for I the LORD dwell
in the midst of the people of Israel.”
Marriage of Female Heirs