NUMBERS 28 [†]The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Command the people
of Israel and say to them, ‘My offering, v my food for my food offerings,
my w pleasing aroma, you shall be careful to offer to me at its appointed
time.’ 3 x And you shall say to them, This is the food offering that you shall
offer to the LORD: two male lambs a year old without blemish, day by day,
as a regular offering. 4The one lamb you shall offer in the morning, and the
other lamb you shall offer at twilight; 5also y a tenth of an ephah [1] of fine
flour for z a grain offering, mixed a with a quarter of a hin [2] of beaten oil.
6It is a b regular burnt offering, which was ordained at Mount Sinai for a
pleasing aroma, a food offering to the LORD.
7Its drink offering shall be a
quarter of a hin for each lamb. In the Holy Place you shall pour out a drink
offering of strong drink to the LORD.
8The other lamb you shall offer at
twilight. Like the grain offering of the morning, and like its drink offering,
you shall offer it as a food offering, with a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
Sabbath Offerings
9[†]“On the Sabbath day, two male lambs a year old without blemish, and
two tenths of an ephah of fine flour for a grain offering, mixed with oil, and
its drink offering: 10this is c the burnt offering of every Sabbath, besides the
regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
Monthly Offerings
11[†] d “At the beginnings of your months, you shall offer a burnt offering to
the LORD: two bulls from the herd, one ram, seven male lambs a year old
without blemish; 12also e three tenths of an ephah of fine flour for a grain
offering, mixed with oil, for each bull, and two tenths of fine flour for a
grain offering, mixed with oil, for the one ram; 13and a tenth of fine flour
mixed with oil as a grain offering for every lamb; for a burnt offering with a
pleasing aroma, a food offering to the LORD.
14Their drink offerings shall be
half a hin of wine for a bull, a third of a hin for a ram, and a quarter of a hin
for a lamb. This is the burnt offering of each month throughout the months
of the year.
15Also f one male goat for a sin offering to the LORD; it shall be
offered besides the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
Passover Offerings
16[†] g “On the fourteenth day of the first month is the LORD’s Passover,
17[†] h and on the fifteenth day of this month is a feast. Seven days shall
unleavened bread be eaten. 18[†] i On the first day there shall be a holy
convocation. You shall not do any ordinary work, 19[†]but offer a food
offering, a burnt offering to the LORD: two bulls from the herd, one ram, and
seven male lambs a year old; j see that they are without blemish; 20also their
grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil; three tenths of an ephah shall
you offer for a bull, and two tenths for a ram; 21a tenth shall you offer for
each of the seven lambs; 22also k one male goat for a sin offering, to make
atonement for you. 23You shall offer these besides the burnt offering of the
morning, which is for a regular burnt offering. 24In the same way you shall
offer daily, for seven days, the food of a food offering, with a pleasing
aroma to the LORD. It shall be offered besides the regular burnt offering and
its drink offering. 25And l on the seventh day you shall have a holy
convocation. You shall not do any ordinary work.
Offerings for the Feast of Weeks
26[†]“On m the day of the firstfruits, when you offer a grain offering of new
grain to the LORD at your Feast of Weeks, you shall have a holy
convocation. You shall not do any ordinary work, 27but offer a burnt
offering, with a pleasing aroma to the LORD: n two bulls from the herd, one
ram, seven male lambs a year old; 28also their grain offering of fine flour
mixed with oil, three tenths of an ephah for each bull, two tenths for one
ram, 29a tenth for each of the seven lambs; 30with o one male goat, to make
atonement for you. 31Besides the regular burnt offering and its grain
offering, you shall offer them and their drink offering. p See that they are
without blemish.
Offerings for the Feast of Trumpets