PHILEMON 1 [†]Paul, a a prisoner for Christ Jesus, and b Timothy our
brother,
To Philemon our beloved fellow worker 2[†]and Apphia our sister and
c Archippus our d fellow soldier, and e the church in your house:
3 f Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Philemon’s Love and Faith
4[†] g I thank my God always when I remember you in my prayers, 5because
I h hear of your love and i of the faith that you have toward the Lord Jesus
and for all the saints, 6[†]and I pray that the sharing of your faith may
become effective for the full j knowledge of every good thing that is in us
for the sake of Christ. [1] 7[†]For I have derived much joy and k comfort
from your love, my brother, because the hearts of the saints l have been
refreshed through you.
Paul’s Plea for Onesimus
8[†]Accordingly, m though I am bold enough in Christ to command you to
do n what is required, 9yet for love’s sake I prefer to appeal to you—I, Paul,
an old man and now o a prisoner also for Christ Jesus— 10[†]I appeal to you
for p my child, q Onesimus, [2] r whose father I became in my
imprisonment. 11[†](Formerly he was useless to you, but now he is indeed
useful to you and to me.) 12[†]I am sending him back to you, sending my
very heart. 13I would have been glad to keep him with me, in order that he
might serve me s on your behalf t during my imprisonment for the gospel,
14but I preferred to do nothing without your consent in order that your
goodness might not be u by compulsion but of your own accord. 15[†]For
this perhaps is why v he was parted from you for a while, that you might
have him back forever,
16[†] w no longer as a bondservant [3] but more than a
bondservant, as x a beloved brother—especially to me, but how much more
to you, y both in the flesh and in the Lord.
17[†]So if you consider me z your partner, receive him as you would
receive me. 18[†]If he has wronged you at all, or owes you anything, charge
that to my account. 19 a I, Paul, write this with my own hand: I will repay it
—to say nothing of your owing me even your own self. 20[†]Yes, brother, I
want some benefit from you in the Lord. b Refresh my heart in Christ.
21[†] c Confident of your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will
do even more than I say.
22[†]At the same time, prepare a guest room for
me, for d I am hoping that e through your prayers f I will be graciously
given to you.
Final Greetings
23[†] g Epaphras, my h fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends greetings to
you, 24[†]and so do i Mark, i Aristarchus, j Demas, and j Luke, my fellow
workers.
25 k The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Study Notes for Philemon
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 1–3 Greetings. The beginning of this letter follows
Paul’s typical style, but it is addressed to a person rather than an entire
community of believers.
FACT
How did a person become a bondservant? Being a “bondservant” in NT
times (v. 16) was different from many of the more recent kinds of
slavery. Bondservants were bound to serve their master for a specific
period of time. People did not necessarily become slaves because of their
race, nor were they completely without legal rights. A person might
become a slave as punishment for a crime or as a way to pay off a debt.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 1 On Timothy, see Introduction to 1 Timothy.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 2 Apphia may have been Philemon’s wife. Archippus
may have been Philemon’s son. He may have had a significant ministry in
Colossae (see Col. 4:17). the church in your house. The early Christians
met in private homes. Philemon opened his home in Colossae (Col. 4:15;
see note on 1 Cor. 16:19).
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 4–7 Thanksgiving and Prayer. Before Paul makes
his appeal, he expresses his gratitude for Philemon (vv. 4–5) and
describes how he prays for him (vv. 6–7).
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 6 Sharing as used here includes the ideas of
generosity, partnership, and fellowship. These result from the common faith
and common life that believers have in Christ. Paul lays the groundwork for
his appeal to Philemon on behalf of Onesimus. knowledge of every good
thing. That is, a deep awareness and experience of the blessings of Christ.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 7 hearts. See note on v. 12.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 8–20 Paul’ s Appeal to Philemon for Onesimus. Paul
makes his appeal by first describing the remarkable change that has
happened to Onesimus (vv. 8–12). He explains how helpful Onesimus
would be to him in his imprisonment (vv. 13–14). Paul then suggests that
God has been sovereignly involved in this situation, so that Philemon may
receive Onesimus back now as a fellow Christian (vv. 15–16). Onesimus
will therefore be all the more useful to Philemon. He concludes with a
direct appeal that Philemon receive Onesimus back as he would receive
Paul himself (vv. 17–20).
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 8–9 Bold suggests a “frankness” or “openness” to
speak freely about difficult matters. an old man. Paul may have been 60 or
older.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 10 The name Onesimus means “useful” or
“profitable.” This name was frequently given to bondservants. Onesimus is
also mentioned in Col. 4:9 as accompanying Tychicus with the letter to the
Colossians.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 11 useless . . . useful. The play on words describes the
“before and after” of Onesimus’s conversion. By stealing from Philemon
and running away, Onesimus had become “useless.” Having repented and
become obedient to Christ, Onesimus had now become “useful” both to
Paul and to Philemon.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 12 my very heart. Not the common word for heart,
but literally “internal organs” (especially the stomach and intestines). The
word indicates affection, intimacy, and deep love (see vv. 7, 20; Phil. 2:1;
Col. 3:12).
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 15 why he was parted from you. God is understood
to be sovereignly behind the events. It is like Joseph’s remark to his
brothers that “it was not you who sent me here, but God” (Gen. 45:8).
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 16 no longer as a bondservant. Paul expects an
entirely transformed relationship between Philemon and Onesimus based on
the fact that Onesimus was now Philemon’s beloved brother.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 17 Partner is from the same root word as “sharing” in
v. 6.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 18–19 If he has wronged you suggests that Onesimus
probably took money from Philemon when he ran away. Roman society
expected brutal punishment of runaway slaves or bondservants, at times
resulting in death. (Regarding servitude in Roman society, see notes on 1
Cor. 7:21 and Eph. 6:5, and the esv Preface.) I, Paul, write this with my
own hand. Although Paul was probably dictating the letter to Timothy (see
Philem. 1), Paul signs his own name. This action gives his personal
guarantee that he will repay any loss Philemon has experienced because of
Onesimus’s actions. This is a remarkable offer, considering that Paul was a
prisoner at the time. owing me even your own self. A reference to the fact
that Philemon was converted through Paul’s ministry. Philemon “owed”
Paul his eternal life. The debt that Onesimus owed to Philemon, therefore,
was tiny by comparison.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 20 Refresh my heart in Christ. See note on v. 12.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 21–25 Personal Remarks and Greetings. Paul
concludes the letter by sharing his plans to travel to Colossae (vv. 21–22).
He also sends greetings from various coworkers in Rome (vv. 23–25).
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 21 Even more could suggest freeing Onesimus or
perhaps sending Onesimus back to minister to Paul (compare vv. 13–14).
Paul may have deliberately given Philemon the freedom to decide which
course of action would be best.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 22 prepare a guest room for me. Paul hopes to be
released from prison and come to Colossae for a visit.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 23 Epaphras is one of Philemon’s fellow Colossians.
God had used him to plant the church in Colossae (Col. 1:7; 4:12). fellow
prisoner. The circumstances of Epaphras’s arrest are unknown.
PHILEMON—NOTE ON 24 Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke are also
named in Col. 4:10, 14. For Mark, see Acts 12:12. For Aristarchus, see Acts
19:29. Demas later was drawn away by worldly pursuits and deserted Paul
(2 Tim. 4:10). Luke is almost certainly the one who authored the Gospel of
Luke and Acts (see 2 Tim. 4:11). Luke was apparently with Paul throughout
his two-year imprisonment in Caesarea and also during his two-year Roman
imprisonment.
H e b r e w s
(return to table of contents)
Hebrews 1 • Hebrews 2 • Hebrews 3 • Hebrews 4 • Hebrews 5
•
Hebrews 6 • Hebrews 7 • Hebrews 8 • Hebrews 9 • Hebrews 10
Hebrews 11 • Hebrews 12 • Hebrews 13
•
Introduction to Hebrews
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Key Themes
Outline
Global Message of Hebrews
Hebrews and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Hebrews
The Global Message of Hebrews for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Hebrews
Introduction to Hebrews
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
The author of Hebrews is unknown. He knew Timothy (13:23). He was not
an eyewitness of Jesus (see 2:1, 3). The letter was probably written before
A.D. 70. Early manuscripts bear the title “To the Hebrews,” which reflects
the ancient assumption that it was written to Jewish Christians as well as
Gentile Christians who previously had been drawn to the Jewish religion.
The author knew his readers and wanted to see them again (13:19).
Theme
Jesus Christ is greater than any angel, priest, or old covenant practice.
Christians must not forsake the great salvation that Jesus has brought about.
They must hold on by faith to the true rest found in Christ, and they must
encourage others in the church to do the same.
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Hebrews has two primary purposes: to encourage Christians to endure, and
to warn them not to abandon their faith in Christ. These warning passages
appear throughout the book (2:1–4; 3:7–4:13; 5:11–6:12; 10:19–39; 12:1–
29). The author encourages faithfulness, love, and sound doctrine. He does
so by carefully teaching the OT in light of God’s revelation in Jesus Christ.
The author shows the superiority of Christ and his new covenant over
angels, Moses, the OT priesthood, and the OT sacrificial system. These are
so inferior to Christ that it is futile to return to them—or to go anywhere
else. Rather, believers should hold fast to their faith, because that faith is
grounded in the most superior revelation.
The background of such exhortations must have been the readers’ need to
continue enduring amid persecution and the trials of life (e.g., ch. 12). They
appear to have grown less attentive to Christian instruction (5:11–14), and
some apparently have ceased regular attendance at their meetings (10:25).
The author reminds them of their past faithfulness and love despite
persecution (10:32–34).
Ultimately, the author’s words of encouragement and exhortation are
rooted in his teaching about Jesus Christ. The Son of God became the
heavenly high priest, who offered himself as a sacrifice once for all. Christ
obtained salvation for all who approach him in faith (6:1; 11:6; compare
4:2), and such faith perseveres until it receives the promised eternal reward
(6:12; 10:22, 38–39).
Key Themes
1. Jesus is fully God and fully man (1:1–14; 2:5–18).
2. Jesus, the Son of God, reveals God the Father. He is the creator and he
sustains all creation (1:1–14).
3. Jesus is the eternal high priest. As a man, he sympathizes with human
weaknesses, and he offered himself as the perfect sacrifice for sin (1:3;
2:10–18; 4:15–16; 9:11–10:19).
4. Jesus is superior to angels, to Moses, to the Mosaic covenant, to the
earthly tabernacle, and to the priesthood (1:4–2:18; 3:1–6; 5:1–10;
7:1–10:18).
5. All humanity faces eternal judgment for sin (4:12–13; 9:27–28; 10:26–
31).
6. Faith is necessary to please God and to participate in his eternal
salvation. Faith requires confidence about the unseen realities of God
and his promises. Such faith produces perseverance (6:1; 10:22, 38–
39; 11:1–40).
7. Perseverance is necessary in the Christian life; believers are warned
against a lack of endurance (2:1–4; 3:7–4:13; 10:19–39; 12:1–29).
8. God’s promises are trustworthy, including his promise of eternal
salvation (6:13–20).
9. With the coming of Jesus Christ, the last days have begun. They will
be completed when he returns (1:2; 9:9–28; 12:22–29).
Outline
I. Jesus Is Superior to Angelic Beings (1:1–2:18)
II. Jesus Is Superior to the Mosaic Law (3:1–10:18)
III. Call to Faith and Endurance (10:19–12:29)
IV . Concluding Encouragements and Remarks (13:1–25)
The Global Message of Hebrews
The message of Hebrews for the global church is that Jesus is better than
every other thing believers are tempted to fall back into, such as their
formers ways of sin, culturally comfortable patterns of thinking or living, or
non-Christian ethical codes. In the midst of adversity, believers are to fix
their eyes on Jesus, live by faith, and run the race that is marked out for
them.
Hebrews and Redemptive History
The book of Hebrews displays a clear and profound awareness of
redemptive history. Through its quotations from the Old Testament,
interpretation of past events, and reflection upon saints of old such as
Moses or Melchizedek, Hebrews presents rich teaching on the story of
salvation that has culminated in Jesus Christ.
While Hebrews makes many individual points relating to redemptive
history, all this serves to make one basic point: Jesus is superior. Jesus is
better than the prophets (Heb. 1:1–2), better than the angels (1:5–14), better
than Moses (3:1–19), better than the priests (4:14–5:10; 7:23–28), better
than Melchizedek (6:19–7:19), and better than all previous sacrifices (9:11–
14; 10:19). Through Jesus, God has brought about the longed-for new
covenant (8:1–13; 9:15).
Hebrews therefore views all of history as falling into two broad eras. The
first is the old age, which has been abolished with the coming of Christ. The
second is the new age, which has dawned with the coming of Christ. Jesus
Christ is the hinge, the turning point of all of human history. Those who
have been ushered into the new age would therefore be foolish to turn back
the clock and try to enter once more into the old age.
Universal Themes in Hebrews
Jesus and suffering. Throughout Hebrews the author encourages his readers
to stand fast in the midst of their troubles (e.g., Heb. 10:32–33). He does so
by connecting the suffering of his readers to the suffering of Christ.
“Consider him who endured from sinners such hostility against himself, so
that you may not grow weary or fainthearted” (12:3). Jesus himself has
experienced whatever suffering believers experience. “We do not have a
high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who
in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin” (4:15). The
result of Jesus’ enduring all our weakness is that he is uniquely qualified to
represent his people before God. Jesus “had to be made like his brothers in
every respect, so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest”
(2:17).
There is deep comfort for the church in what Hebrews says about Jesus
and his suffering. We learn that our suffering, especially when it is due to
our loyalty to Jesus, is not experienced alone. He himself has gone through
it. Jesus draws near to his people who are in the darkness of adversity. He is
the friend of sufferers. He knows what it is to be rejected (Heb. 13:11–13).
Suffering is not inherently good; it is a result of the fall and will one day be
completely eradicated. But in the meantime, believers around the world
take heart, knowing that whatever pain is upon them is a pain for which
Jesus, our great high priest, cares deeply and which he himself has
experienced. And it is a pain that can only work to produce greater glory for
those who are united to Christ (Rom. 8:17–18; 2 Cor. 4:17–18).
The danger of apostasy. “Apostasy” means to fall away from faith in
Christ. More than any other New Testament book, Hebrews addresses the
danger of Christians failing to persevere by faith to the end (Heb. 2:1–4;
3:7–4:13; 5:11–6:12; 10:19–39; 12:1–29). The writer describes faithful
discipleship as a race that requires endurance (12:1). On the one hand,
perseverance is not a self-generated effort that is wholly up to us, as a way
of earning our final acceptance. Indeed, as much as Hebrews calls on
believers to persevere, it comforts believers with the glorious truth that
Jesus has offered the sacrifice that fully pays for our sins and guarantees our
eternal acceptance (9:1–10:18). On the other hand, this book calls on
Christians to live in a way that honors our Lord and Savior. We must endure
(10:36). We must look to Jesus (12:1–2). This will require strenuous
earnestness as we labor on toward the end of this race, imitating “those who
through faith and patience inherit the promises” (6:11–12).
There is deep strengthening for the church today in this call to
perseverance. The temptation to quit the Christian life is universal and must
be resisted. Our call in the gospel is to fix our eyes on Christ, weathering
the storms that threaten to sink us as we journey on through this fallen
world. The specific forms of what will threaten our faith will vary culturally
around the world. But the call to faith and the Christ whom we trust remain
the same.
The Global Message of Hebrews for Today
Endless distractions bombard believers around the world today. The news
media and volatile economies provide an endless stream of temptations to
worry. The Internet and the array of devices through which to connect to it
are more widely available than ever before. Potential wars and actual wars
rage within nations and between nations. Natural disasters continue to
remind us how fragile life is, despite the massive technological and medical
advances of recent decades. And in the midst of this, we are dealing with
the more immediate challenges of simply keeping our marriages and
families together.
As twenty-first-century Christians, it can be difficult to “look to Jesus”
(see Heb. 12:2). And yet beneath every reason for discouragement or
distraction, our great High Priest lives and stands, interceding for his
brothers and sisters from every tribe and people and nation. He has
experienced all our suffering and more. He knows our weakness. Let us run
the race of faith. “Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without
wavering, for he who promised is faithful” (10:23).
The Supremacy of God’s Son