PHILIPPIANS 4 [†]Therefore, my brothers, [1] whom I love and j long for,
k my joy and l crown, m stand firm thus in the Lord, my beloved.
Exhortation, Encouragement, and Prayer
2[†]I entreat Euodia and I entreat Syntyche to n agree in the Lord. 3[†]Yes, I
ask you also, true companion, [2] help these women, who have labored side
by side with me in the gospel together with Clement and the rest of my
fellow workers, o whose names are in the book of life.
4 p Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, rejoice. 5[†]Let your
reasonableness be known to everyone. q The Lord is at hand; 6[†] r do not be
anxious about anything, s but in everything by prayer and supplication
t with thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God. 7And u the
peace of God, v which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts
and your minds in Christ Jesus.
8[†]Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is
just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if
there is any excellence, if there is anything worthy of praise, think about
these things. 9What you have learned and w received and heard and seen x in
me—practice these things, and y the God of peace will be with you.
God’s Provision
10I rejoiced in the Lord greatly that now at length z you have revived your
concern for me. You were indeed concerned for me, but you had no
opportunity.
11Not that I am speaking of being in need, for I have learned in
whatever situation I am to be a content. 12[†]I know how to be brought low,
and I know how to abound. In any and every circumstance, I have learned
the secret of facing plenty and b hunger, abundance and c need. 13I can do
all things d through him who strengthens me.
14[†]Yet it was kind of you e to share [3] my trouble. 15And you
Philippians yourselves know that f in the beginning of the gospel, when I
left Macedonia, g no church entered into partnership with me in giving and
receiving, except you only.
16Even in Thessalonica you sent me help for my
needs once and again. 17[†] h Not that I seek the gift, but I seek i the fruit
that increases to your credit. [4] 18[†]I have received full payment, and more.
I am well supplied, j having received from Epaphroditus the gifts you sent,
k a fragrant offering, l a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to God. 19And my
God m will supply every need of yours n according to his riches in glory in
Christ Jesus. 20To o our God and Father be p glory forever and ever. Amen.
Final Greetings
21[†]Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. q The brothers who are with me greet
you. 22 r All the saints greet you, especially those of Caesar’s household.
23 s The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Study Notes for Philippians
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:1–11 Greeting and Prayer. Paul greets his readers
and expresses his gratitude (vv. 3–6) and affection (vv. 7–8) for them. He
then prays that their love and holiness will increase (vv. 9–11).
FACT
The imperial guard that Paul mentions in 1:13 was probably the Roman
emperor’s group of elite personal bodyguards. Through his imprisonment,
Paul was able to tell them about Christ. Because of this, Paul rejoiced even
in the midst of his difficult circumstances (1:18).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:1–2 Paul, along with Timothy, gives the standard
early Christian greeting of grace and peace. Paul calls Timothy and himself
servants. The emphasis on service prepares for the rest of the letter, especially
2:5–11. It is uncertain what level of formal church government is implied by
overseers and deacons. Overseers were probably elders, charged with spiritual
oversight of the congregation (see Acts 14:23 and note; 20:17, 28; 1 Tim. 3:1–
7; Titus 1:5–9; James 5:14; 1 Pet. 5:1–4). Deacons were probably in charge of
practical service (see Acts 6:1–7; 1 Tim. 3:8–13).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:3–11 Paul’s letters frequently begin with thanksgiving
and prayer. The prayer here helps establish the letter’s major themes.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:3–5 The Philippians’ partnership in the gospel
includes their financial support of Paul (4:15–16) and their concern for his
well-being.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:6 will bring it to completion. Genuine spiritual
progress is built upon what God has done, is doing, and will continue to do.
God’s faithfulness means he will be with believers until Jesus returns (the day
of Jesus Christ; compare 2:16; 1 Thess. 5:2–11; 2 Pet. 3:10–13).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:7–8 Paul’s imprisonment would have been a source
of great shame in that culture, but the Philippians still supported him.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:9–11 Pure and blameless does not imply instant
spiritual perfection. It means an increasing likeness to Christ. fruit of
righteousness. Because that fruit comes through Jesus Christ, it will result in
the glory and praise of God.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:12–30 Paul’ s Reflections on His Imprisonment. Paul
assures the Philippians that the gospel is still advancing even though he is in
prison (vv. 12–18). He is joyfully confident. No matter what happens, he will
be delivered and Christ will be honored. For him, to live is Christ and to die is
gain (vv. 19–26). Paul encourages his readers to live for Christ, even while
suffering (vv. 27–30).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:12–18 Paul encourages the Philippians by pointing
out that his being in prison has provided many opportunities to proclaim the
gospel. Considering that there was some disunity among the Christians in
Philippi (vv. 15–18; compare 4:2–3), Paul’s joy amid his difficult
circumstances should be an example for them.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:12 The word Paul uses for the advance of the gospel
is the same word he uses in v. 25 for the Philippians’ “progress” in faith.
Christians should seek to advance God’s kingdom rather than dwelling on past
or present problems.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:15–18 Those who preach Christ from envy and
rivalry are likely Christians who preached the gospel but were at odds with
Paul for some reason.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:19 deliverance. Either deliverance from prison or the
deliverance of eternal salvation. Paul may intend both meanings, since he
mentions his imprisonment in vv. 12–14 and focuses on the eternal in v. 23.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:20 The crucial thing for Paul is not life or death. It is
maintaining his faithful witness to Christ.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:21 Paul’s life is all about the advancement of Christ’s
kingdom. Thus, to live means serving Christ. To die is gain, because then Paul
would be in Christ’s presence.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:22–26 Paul knows that the way of Jesus is the way of
service (see 2:5–11). He is convinced that he will remain and continue with
the Philippians for their progress and joy in the faith. Paul is not thinking
about his own crisis. He is giving the Philippians a model of the service-driven
life.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:23 My desire is to depart and be with Christ. When
Christians die, they are immediately with Christ—long before their bodies are
raised from the dead (see note on 1 Cor. 15:23).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:27–30 Paul’s sacrifice will be useless, however, if the
Philippians do not continue to live in a way that is “worthy of the gospel of
Christ.”
Philippi in the Time of Paul (c. A.D. 60)
The city plan below shows those features of the city of Philippi that archaeologists have so far identified
as dating from the time of Paul. “Paul’ s Prison” is not believed to be an authentic site, but was a cistern
later associated with Christian worship.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:27 be worthy of the gospel. As the esv footnote
indicates, the Greek can also be translated “behave as citizens worthy [of the
gospel].” Philippi prided itself on being a Roman colony, offering the honor
and privilege of Roman citizenship. Paul reminds the congregation that they
should look to Christ, not Caesar, for their model of behavior. They need to
stand with one another and with Paul in striving for the gospel. Paul’s
emphasis on unity may suggest some division within the Philippian
congregation (see 4:2–3).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:28 destruction. Eternal destruction, so these are
different opponents from those in vv. 15–18, who were Christians. A different
city is in view as well. Here Paul speaks about what is happening in Philippi,
while in vv. 15–18 his opponents are probably in Rome. Paul follows Jesus’
teaching here (Matt. 5:10–12), reminding them that persecution shows they
belong to Christ.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 1:29–30 Both suffering and faith have been granted to
you as gifts of God. Suffering for the sake of Jesus is a great privilege (see
Matt. 5:10–12; Acts 5:41). Paul again presents himself as an example of one
who has maintained his joy while experiencing the same conflict (that is,
opposition from hostile unbelievers).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:1–30 Encouragement to Humble Service. Paul calls
the Philippians to unite in love and humility (vv. 1–4), following Christ’s
example (vv. 5–11). They are to live as lights in the world (vv. 12–18), as do
Christ’s faithful servants Timothy (vv. 19–24) and Epaphroditus (vv. 25–30).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:1–2 Paul knows that encouragement, participation
in the Spirit, affection, and sympathy are realities in Christ and are present
in the congregation at Philippi. He uses a conditional sentence (if) to lead the
Philippians to reflect on whether these qualities are evident in their lives. of the
same mind. They are to use their different gifts (see 1 Corinthians 12) in a
cooperative way, focusing on God’s glory.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:3–4 Paul realizes that everyone naturally looks out for
his or her own interests. The key is to take that same level of concern and
apply it also to the interests of others. Such radical love is rare, so Paul shows
its supreme example in Jesus’ life (vv. 5–11).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:5–11 This passage is often referred to as the “hymn of
Christ.” Paul describes Christ’s example of service in a poem that traces his
preexistence, incarnation, death, resurrection, and ascension to the right hand
of God. Paul wrote this magnificent hymn to encourage the Philippians to
consider other people’s interests first (see v. 4). Verses 6–11 have some clear
indications of poetic structure, leading some to believe that this is a hymn
adapted by Paul. It is just as likely, however, that Paul wrote the hymn
specifically for this setting. In view of the many theological questions that arise
in these verses, it is important to keep two things in mind: (1) these verses were
written not to create theological debate but to encourage greater humility and
love; and (2) the summary of Christ’s life and ministry here is not unique. The
same themes are evident throughout the NT.
FACT
The heart of Philippians is the magnificent “hymn of Christ” in 2:5–11. Paul
poetically describes Jesus’ preexistence and equality with God, his
incarnation as a man, his death and resurrection. He is the supreme example
of humility and personal sacrifice for the sake of others (2:3–5).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:5 The believer’s mind needs to think about the proper
example, if life is to be lived for God. Scholars debate whether this mind-set is
received by virtue of being united to Christ (which is yours in Christ Jesus),
or by following the model of Christ (esv footnote: “which was also in Christ
Jesus”). The latter idea is more popular, but both ideas are true. In either case,
the central theme of vv. 1–5 is the same: the Philippian church should be of one
mind (v. 2), united by love (v. 2) and humility (v. 3), and looking out for the
interests of others (v. 4).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:6 Prior to his incarnation as a human being, Jesus was
in the form of God. This phrase refers to the “preexistence” of Christ. The
eternal Son was with the Father (John 1:1; 17:5, 24) before he was born in
Bethlehem. “Form” here means the true and exact nature of something,
possessing all the characteristics and qualities of that thing. Therefore having
the “form of God” is essentially the same as having equality with God. It is
directly contrasted with having the “form of a servant” (Phil. 2:7). The Son of
God is and always has been God. See also Heb. 1:3 and Col. 1:15. Remarkably,
Christ did not imagine that having “equality with God” (which he already
possessed) should lead him to hold onto his privileges at all costs. It was not
something to be grasped, to be used for his own benefit or advantage. Instead,
he had a mind-set of service.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:7 emptied himself. The Greek can also mean “give
up status and privilege.” Paul is not saying that Christ became less than God or
gave up any of his divine attributes. Nor is he discussing whether Jesus was all-
powerful or all-knowing during his time on earth. Nor is he saying that Christ
ever gave up being “in the form of God” (v. 6). Rather, Paul is saying that,
even though Christ had all the privileges of being King of the universe, he gave
them up to become a Jewish baby bound for the cross. He “emptied himself”
by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. He had
every right to stay in a position of power, but his love for sinful mankind drove
him to accept a lowly position (compare 2 Cor. 8:9). The “emptying” consisted
of his becoming human, not of giving up any part of his true deity.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:8 It is remarkable enough that God the Son would
take on human form for a broken world. But Jesus went much farther,
becoming obedient (compare Rom. 5:19) to the point of death, even death
on a cross. Crucifixion was the ultimate humiliation, and the physical pain was
terrible (see note on Matt. 27:35). It was the total opposite of the divine
majesty of the preexistent Christ. Thus it was the ultimate expression of
Christ’s obedience to the Father.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:9 By humbling himself on the cross out of love, Jesus
demonstrated that he truly shared the divine nature of God, who is love (1 John
4:8). For this very reason (Therefore), God raised him to life and highly
exalted him, entrusting him with the rule of the cosmos and giving him the
name that is above every name. Following his death and resurrection, Jesus
received a status and authority that had not been his before the incarnation
(compare Matt. 28:18; Acts 2:33).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:10–11 every knee should bow . . . and every tongue
confess. Paul quotes Isa. 45:23. In Isaiah these words apply to Yahweh, the
personal name for God. Thus, when Paul claims Jesus Christ is Lord, he is
saying that Jesus is God. But Jesus’ exaltation also results in the glory of God
the Father. The same pattern occurs in 1 Cor. 15:23–28. Even though he is
equal with God the Father, Jesus remains the model of loving service to him.
Joy and Rejoicing in Philippians
Reference Paul . . .
1:4 prays with joy
1:18 rejoices that Christ is proclaimed
1:25 will remain living on earth, for the Philippians’ joy in the faith
2:2 asks the Philippians to complete his joy
2:17–18 is glad and rejoices with the Philippians
2:28 sends Epaphroditus, that the Philippians might rejoice
2:29 tells the Philippians to receive Epaphroditus with joy
3:1 tells the Philippians to rejoice in the Lord
4:1 tells the Philippians they are his joy
4:4 tells the Philippians twice to rejoice in the Lord
4:10 rejoiced in the Lord at the Philippians’ concern for him
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:12–18 With the breathtaking portrayal of Christ
before them (vv. 5–11), Paul exhorts the Philippians to demonstrate the same
faith and obedience in their everyday lives.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:12–13 The Philippians have obeyed in the past and
should continue to do so as they work out their salvation with fear and
trembling. But while God’s justice is a cause for sober living (“fear and
trembling”), Paul does not want the Philippians to think that they can never
merit God’s favor. Rather, it is God’s love and enabling grace that will see
them through: it is God who works in you. They can rejoice in God’s
empowering presence even as they work hard at living responsible Christian
lives. While v. 12 may seem to suggest salvation by works, Paul clearly rejects
any such teaching (see 3:2–11). both to will and to work for his good
pleasure. Even the desire to do what is good comes from God.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:14–15 The Philippians should shine as lights amid a
crooked and twisted generation. Paul’s choice of words recalls the wilderness
generation of Israel, who in Deut. 32:5 are described by these very words
(“crooked and twisted generation”). Shining “as lights” recalls Dan. 12:2–3.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:16 holding fast. Believing God’s Word and following
it.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:17 A drink offering involved pouring out wine, either
onto the ground or, as here, on an altar along with an animal or grain sacrifice
(see Num. 28:7). It illustrates a life “poured out” for God’s service (compare 2
Tim. 4:6). The Philippians, too, are a sacrificial offering.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:19–24 Timothy follows Christ in that he is
concerned for the Philippians’ welfare.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:25–30 Epaphroditus, who is from Philippi, is another
example of genuine Christian love.
TIMOTHY
Timothy was from Lystra in South Galatia and was the son of a Jewish
mother and a Greek father. Timothy, along with his mother and grandmother,
may have been led to Christ during Paul’s first visit to Lystra. Timothy
joined Paul as a coworker when Paul passed through his hometown early on
his second missionary journey. Paul trusted Timothy immensely, and sent
him on a number of important missions to strengthen and encourage
churches as well as to deal with doctrinal and theological problems.
Although he was young, Timothy proved himself to be a godly and effective
leader. In Philippians 2:19–24, Paul describes Timothy as an example of a
Christ-centered life. Paul also referred to Timothy by the lofty title “God’s
coworker,” emphasizing his credentials (1 Thess. 3:2). Two of the NT
epistles are letters written from Paul to Timothy. (Philippians 2:19–22)
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 2:30 Having said that Jesus was obedient “to the point
of death” (v. 8), Paul now says that Epaphroditus was “near to death” (v. 27)
and that he nearly died. Epaphroditus had faced death on behalf of the
Philippians. They had desired to send gifts to Paul but were unable to do so
(what was lacking in your service to me) until Epaphroditus made it possible
(see 4:10, 18).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:1–21 Opponents of the Gospel: Where Does
Righteous­ ness Come From? Paul calls on the Philippians to rejoice in the Lord
(v. 1). He then warns them about the Judaizers who oppose the gospel (vv. 2–
3). Paul’s conflicts with the Judaizers can be seen in greater detail in Acts and
Galatians (e.g., Acts 15:1–19; Gal. 2:15–21; 3:6–4:31), as well as in the rest of
his letters. Paul rejected their teaching that Gentiles must first become Jews
and obey all the OT laws in order to be saved. In contrast, Paul has given up
his spiritual and ethnic privileges for the sake of knowing Christ (Phil. 3:4–11).
His righteousness comes through Christ, not the law (vv. 12–16). He then calls
the Philippians to follow his example of commitment to Jesus as Lord (vv. 17–
21).
FACT
Encouragement is an important theme in Paul’s letter to the Philippians. The
words for “joy” or “rejoice” occur more than a dozen times in this brief
letter.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:2 dogs. A term of insult in the ancient world,
sometimes used by Jews to describe Gentiles. With biting irony, Paul says that
the Judaizers, not the Gentiles, deserve that label. He describes those who
believe in salvation by works as evildoers and those who mutilate the flesh.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:3 we are the circumcision. The true people of God
are those who worship by the Spirit of God (see John 4:23–24). They glory
in Christ Jesus (compare Phil. 1:26) and put no confidence in the flesh. This
verse mentions all three members of the Trinity: “God,” “Christ Jesus,” and
“the Spirit of God.”
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:4–6 Paul had a strong Jewish background. He was
circumcised on the eighth day (see Lev. 12:3). He was an ethnic Israelite and
knew the tribe from which he came. Hebrew of Hebrews probably indicates
his descent from Jewish ancestors. He was from the strictest religious sect—the
Pharisees (Acts 26:5). His zeal was such that he had even been a persecutor of
the church. If anyone could be said to be blameless in following the law, it
was Paul.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:7–8 gain . . . loss. What formerly went into Paul’s
gain column—his power, position, and performance—now goes into the loss
column. Compare Matt. 16:25–26.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:9 Christians are found in Christ and therefore not
found guilty before God. through faith in Christ. God credits Christ’s lifelong
record of perfect obedience to the person who trusts in Christ for salvation. See
note on Gal. 2:16.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:10–11 the power of his resurrection. The power
Christ exercises now from his position at the right hand of God.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:12 Paul stresses that he is not already perfect. He
still struggles with sin. Jesus’ return and the end of sin remains in the future.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:14 The Greek word for goal can mean either the
finish line in a race or an archery target. The prize for Christians is the
blessings and rewards in the age to come.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:15 Mature is the same adjective translated “perfect”
in v. 12. Paul is essentially saying, “If you are really perfect/mature, you will
realize that you are not yet perfect/mature!”
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:17 Paul asks the Philippians to join in imitating me
and other mature Christians (compare 4:9; 1 Cor. 11:1; 2 Thess. 3:8–9; Heb.
13:7).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:18–19 The enemies of the cross could be the
Judaizers of v. 2 or “worldly” people in general.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:20 citizenship. See note on 1:27 and the esv footnote.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 3:21 Transform our lowly body to be like his glorious
body echoes 2:5–11. To subject all things to himself is language about the
Messiah drawn from the OT (e.g., Ps. 8:6; 110:1).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:1–23 Concluding Encouragement and
Thanksgiving. Paul calls for reconciliation, joyful faith, and disciplined
thinking.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:1 Therefore. This transitional verse can be read as
either the conclusion to the previous section or the introduction to ch. 4. my
joy and crown. The Philippians’ spiritual success would be Paul’s “crowning
achievement” (compare 1 Thess. 2:19–20).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:2 Paul does not reveal the source of tension between
Euodia and Syntyche. Agree and “being of the same mind” (2:2) translate the
same Greek phrase.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:3 true companion. See esv footnote. labored side by
side. Compare 1:27, where Paul also encourages unity among those who are
“striving side by side” (the same verb used here) for the gospel. In view of
first-century culture, Euodia and Syntyche probably ministered mainly among
women. The book of life refers to God’s record of those who belong to him
(Ex. 32:33; Ps. 69:28; see Rev. 3:5; 20:12, 15; 21:27).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:5 reasonableness. Seeking what is best for everyone
and not just for oneself. The Lord is at hand. Jesus will return as judge and
will hold people responsible for their deeds (see James 5:9).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:6–7 do not be anxious. See Matt. 6:25–34.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:8 think about these things. The Philippians must fill
their minds with things that inspire worship of God and service to others.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:12–13 I can do all things through him who
strengthens me. This does not mean God will bless whatever a person does. It
means God gives believers the strength to do whatever he asks them to do.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:14–16 The Philippians share in Paul’s ministry by
offering financial support (see note on 1:3–5). They contributed to his work
after he had left Macedonia (4:15) and when he was nearby in Thessalonica
(v. 16; see Acts 17:1).
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:17 Paul reminds the Philippians that even his
acceptance of their financial gifts is ultimately for their benefit. Likely using a
business image, he seeks the fruit that increases to your credit (see esv
footnote: “the profit that accrues to your account”). God sees their sacrifice and
is pleased.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:18 The Philippians’ gift is a fragrant offering (see
Ex. 29:18; Lev. 4:31) and a sacrifice acceptable to God. While Christ has
replaced the offerings of the OT system, the principle of costly devotion to God
remains.
PHILIPPIANS—NOTE ON 4:21–22 The call to greet every saint shows the
personal nature of Paul’s letter. Caesar’s household could refer to the “royal
family” and to anyone connected with the emperor’s service, such as soldiers,
slaves, or freedmen. It is likely that some of the latter group had responded
positively to Paul’s message. There is no evidence that the emperor’s actual
family were believers at this point.
FACT
Caesar’s household (4:22) could refer either to the “royal family” or to
anyone connected with the emperor’s service. This could include soldiers,
slaves, and freedmen, who were most likely the crowd Paul was speaking of.
Apparently even people within the imperial household were trusting in
Christ.
C o l o s s i a n s
(return to table of contents)
Colossians 1 • Colossians 2 • Colossians 3 • Colossians 4
Introduction to Colossians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
Theme
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
Key Themes
Outline
The Setting of Colossians
Global Message of Colossians
Colossians and Redemptive History
Universal Themes in Colossians
The Global Message of Colossians for Today
Study Notes
Introduction to Colossians
Introduction to Colossians
Timeline
Author, Date, and Recipients
The apostle Paul wrote this letter to Christians living in the small city of
Colossae. It was probably written c. A.D. 62, while Paul was in prison in Rome
(Acts 27–28). This was about the same time he wrote Ephesians and Philemon.
All three letters were sent with Tychicus and Onesimus.
Theme
Christ is Lord over all of creation, including the invisible realm. He has
redeemed his people, enabling them to participate in his death, resurrection,
and fullness.
Purpose, Occasion, and Background
A dangerous teaching was threatening the church at Colossae, one that lessened
Christ’s role and undermined the new identity of believers “in Christ” (1:2, 28).
Paul wrote to warn against this false teaching and to encourage the believers in
their growth toward Christian maturity. He emphasizes Christ’s authority over
all evil powers. Christians are united with the risen Christ, and therefore they
share in his power and authority. Paul also encourages these believers to fight
against sin, pursue holiness, and live as distinctively Christian households.
Key Themes
1. Jesus Christ is preeminent over all creation, Lord over all human rulers
and cosmic powers (1:15–20; 2:9–10; 3:1).
2. God has acted through Christ to secure redemption and reconciliation for
all who put their faith in him (1:13–14, 20–22).
3. Believers are in Christ, and so they share in Christ’s death, resurrection,
new life, and his fullness (2:9–14; 3:1–4).
4. Christ has defeated the powers of darkness on the cross. Christians share
in his power and authority over that realm (2:10, 15; see also 2:8, 20).
5. Jesus is the fulfillment of Jewish expectation. Christians share in the
heritage of the old covenant people of God through their union with him
(1:12, 21–22, 27).
6. Believers are called to grow in spiritual maturity by getting rid of sinful
practices and developing Christian virtues (1:10–12, 28; 3:1–4:6).
Outline
I. Greeting (1:1–2)
II. Thanksgiving (1:3–8)
III. Prayer (1:9–14)
IV . Praise to Christ (1:15–20)
V . Reconciliation to God (1:21–23)
VI. Paul’s Labor for the Gospel (1:24–2:3)
VII. The Dangerous Teaching at Colossae (2:4–23)
VIII. The Proper Focus: Christ and the Life Above (3:1–4)
IX. Instructions on Living the Christian Life (3:5–4:6)
X. Personal Greetings and Instructions (4:7–17)
XI. Closing (4:18)
The Setting of Colossians
c. A.D. 62
Paul wrote his letter to the Colossians while in prison, probably in Rome.
The church at Colossae was likely established during Paul’s third missionary
journey as he ministered for three years in Ephesus. It appears that Paul did not
personally plant the church there, but instead a Colossian named Epaphras
traveled to Ephesus, responded to Paul’s gospel message, and returned to share
the good news in Colossae.
The Global Message of Colossians
The utter supremacy of Christ: this is the message of Colossians for the
global church. Above all human wisdom and tradition, Christ stands forth as
preeminent over all and sufficient for all. In him “are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge” (Col. 2:3).
Colossians and Redemptive History
Like Philippians, Colossians has no explicit quotations of the Old
Testament to tie this letter to the sweep of God’s redemptive program down
through history. Yet there is much in Colossians that enables believers
around the world to see how this letter connects the dots between their own
lives, what Christ has done, and human history.
What Colossians mainly contributes is a clear and magnificent vision of
who Christ is. At the beginning of time God created mankind in God’s own
image, yet sin scarred this image. Christ, too, the divine Son, “is the image
of the invisible God,” but he is unscarred (Col. 1:15). At the high point of
all history Jesus Christ came to reconcile mankind back to God by going to
a cross (1:20; 2:14). As sinners united to Christ by faith, Christians are
likewise being restored into the image of God that was tragically marred at
the fall in Eden (3:10).
When Christ came, in other words, it was the beginning of the global
restoration of all things (1:20). Adam and Eve were called to be fruitful and
to spread the knowledge of God all across the globe (Gen. 1:28). When they
rebelled, this mission faltered. Christ, however, has done what Adam should
have done, and by his obedience, even to death, has become the Savior of
sinners who have faith in him (Rom. 5:12–19; 1 Cor. 15:22, 45). And the
mantle of what Adam was called to do has now fallen on believers. Paul
uses the very language of Genesis 1 when he exhorts the Colossians to live
“bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the knowledge of God”
(Col. 1:10).
Universal Themes in Colossians
The supremacy and cosmic triumph of Christ. In Colossians 1:15–20 Paul
soars in a majestic proclamation of Christ’s supremacy over creation in
general (1:15–17) and the church in particular (1:18–20). Yet Christ is not
only high and exalted; he also endured extreme suffering as he won a
cosmic triumph over all the hostile forces arrayed against God. Christ
canceled the record of sins that stood against his people by going to the
cross. Paul not only describes the effect of the cross for believers but also
its effect on the forces of hell: “He disarmed the rulers and authorities and
put them to open shame, by triumphing over them” (2:15). In this way
Christ “has delivered us from the domain of darkness”—the domain of the
forces of hell—“and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved Son”
(1:13).
The emptiness of human ways of thinking. Throughout Colossians Paul
shows himself eager to shield his readers from falling into worldly patterns
of thinking and living. He wants no one to “delude” the Colossians “with
plausible arguments” (Col. 2:4). He speaks of the “empty deceit” of “human
tradition” (2:8). Especially toward the end of chapter 2, Paul seems to refer
to false teachers who are tempting the Colossians to be distracted from
Christ’s supremacy and sufficiency (2:16–23). There is always the
temptation to supplement allegiance to Christ with lesser allegiances. But
Jesus Christ himself embodies “all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge”
(2:3).
The new life in Christ. The letter to the Colossians tells us not only of
Christ but also of what it means for believers to live in Christ. The Christian
life is one of resilient gospel-centrality. Believers bear fruit through the
gospel (Col. 1:6), never move on from the hope of the gospel (1:23), and
grow in maturity in the same way that they received the gospel (2:6–7). At
the same time, while never moving past the gospel of grace, believers are
fundamentally new people and are therefore able to grow. We have been
buried with Christ (2:12), resurrected with Christ (2:13; 3:1), and given a
whole new self (3:10). We have been remade. As Christians around the
world today seek to walk with Christ, we do so ever mindful of his
forgiving grace which pardons as well as his restoring grace which
empowers.
The Global Message of Colossians for Today
The world today is brimming with enticing distractions that tempt us to
neglect Christ’s utter sufficiency to save, change, and satisfy us.
Where resources are plentiful, we are easily distracted by loving the
possessions we have. Where resources are lacking, we are easily distracted
by longing for the possessions others have. Education and social prestige
can distract us from Christ. The media constantly barrages us with the
message that only the rich or famous or healthy or attractive can be truly
happy. Christians in various parts of the world today understandably desire
greater political stability or social freedom, yet such goals cannot ultimately
add to all that is ours already through our inheritance in Christ (Col. 1:12;
3:24).
Perhaps more distracting than any of these things is the temptation to add
to Christ’s work through our own work. Fallen people know that they come
short of God’s standard, and this knowledge produces a multitude of
personal and relational dysfunctions. We are all naturally inclined to build
our identities on how we perform in various ways, not only morally but also
through our jobs, reputation, family, or ethnicity.
Yet Christ is enough. In him we are forgiven (Col. 1:13–14, 22; 2:13–14).
In him we now live (3:1–4, 9–10). Above all that beckons to us and tempts
us to shift our focus from the fully sufficient Christ, Colossians invites
believers worldwide to funnel all their desires and affections onto him. All
that is worth having is found in Christ.
Greeting