PROVERBS 11 [†] a A false balance is an abomination to the LORD,
b but a just weight is his delight.
2 c When pride comes, then comes disgrace,
but with d the humble is wisdom.
3 e The integrity of the upright guides them,
f but the crookedness of the treacherous destroys them.
4 g Riches do not profit in the day of wrath,
h but righteousness delivers from death.
5[†] The righteousness of the blameless i keeps his way straight,
but the wicked falls by his own wickedness.
6 h The righteousness of the upright delivers them,
but the treacherous j are taken captive by their lust.
7[†] When the wicked dies, his k hope will perish,
and l the expectation of wealth [1] perishes too.
8 m The righteous is delivered from trouble,
and the wicked walks into it instead.
9[†] With his mouth the godless man would destroy his neighbor,
but by knowledge the righteous are delivered.
10 n When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices,
and when the wicked perish there are shouts of gladness.
11 By the blessing of the upright a city is exalted,
but o by the mouth of the wicked p it is overthrown.
12[†] Whoever q belittles his neighbor lacks sense,
but a man of understanding remains silent.
13 Whoever r goes about slandering reveals secrets,
but he who is trustworthy in spirit keeps a thing covered.
14 Where there is s no guidance, a people falls,
s but in an abundance of counselors there is safety.
15[†] t Whoever puts up security for a stranger will surely suffer harm,
but he who hates striking hands in pledge is secure.
16[†] u A gracious woman gets honor,
and v violent men get riches.
17
w A man who is kind benefits himself,
but a cruel man hurts himself.
18 The wicked earns deceptive wages,
but one who x sows righteousness gets a sure reward.
19 Whoever is steadfast in righteousness y will live,
but z he who pursues evil will die.
20 Those of a crooked heart are b an abomination to the LORD,
but those of c blameless ways are d his delight.
21 e Be assured, f an evil person will not go unpunished,
but g the offspring of the righteous will be delivered.
22 Like h a gold ring in a pig’s snout
is a beautiful woman without discretion.
23[†] The desire of the righteous ends only in good;
i the expectation of the wicked in wrath.
24[†] j One gives k freely, yet grows all the richer;
another withholds what he should give, and only suffers want.
25 l Whoever brings blessing m will be enriched,
and n one who waters will himself be watered.
26 o The people curse him who holds back grain,
but p a blessing is on the head of him who q sells it.
27 Whoever diligently seeks good seeks favor, [2]
but evil comes to r him who searches for it.
28 Whoever s trusts in his riches will fall,
but the righteous will t flourish like a green leaf.
29 Whoever u troubles his own household will v inherit the wind,
and the fool will be servant to the wise of heart.
30[†] The fruit of the righteous is w a tree of life,
and whoever x captures souls is wise.
31 If y the righteous is repaid on earth,
how much more the wicked and the sinner!