PROVERBS 27 [†] Do not boast about tomorrow,
y for you do not know what a day may bring.
2 Let z another praise you, and not your own mouth;
a stranger, and not your own lips.
3[†] A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty,
but a a fool’s provocation is heavier than both.
4 Wrath is cruel, anger is overwhelming,
but who can stand before b jealousy?
5[†] c Better is open rebuke
than hidden love.
6 Faithful are d the wounds of a friend;
profuse are the kisses of an enemy.
7[†] One who is full loathes e honey,
but to one who is hungry everything bitter is sweet.
8 Like f a bird that strays from its nest
is a man who strays from his home.
9 g Oil and perfume make the heart glad,
and the sweetness of a friend comes from his earnest counsel. [1]
10 Do not forsake your friend and h your father’s friend,
and do not go to your brother’s house in the day of your calamity.
i Better is a neighbor who is near
than a brother who is far away.
11[†] j Be wise, k my son, and l make my heart glad,
that I may m answer him who reproaches me.
12 n The prudent sees danger and hides himself,
but o the simple go on and suffer for it.
13 p Take a man’s garment when he has put up security for a stranger,
and hold it in pledge when he puts up security for an adulteress. [2]
14 Whoever blesses his neighbor with a loud voice,
rising early in the morning,
will be counted as cursing.
15[†] q A continual dripping on a rainy day
and a quarrelsome wife are alike;
16 to restrain her is to restrain the wind
or to grasp [3] oil in one’s right hand.
17 Iron sharpens iron,
and one man sharpens another. [4]
18
r Whoever tends a fig tree will eat its fruit,
and he who s guards his master will be honored.
19[†] As in water face reflects face,
so the heart of man reflects the man.
20 t Sheol and Abaddon are u never satisfied,
and v never satisfied are the eyes of man.
21
w The crucible is for silver, and the furnace is for gold,
and a man is tested by his praise.
22 x Crush a fool in a mortar with a pestle
along with crushed grain,
yet his folly will not depart from him.
23 y Know well the condition of your flocks,
and y give attention to your herds,
24 for z riches do not last forever;
and does a crown endure to all generations?
25 a When the grass is gone and the new growth appears
and the vegetation of the mountains is gathered,
26
b the lambs will provide your clothing,
and the goats the price of a field.
27 b There will be enough goats’ milk for your food,
for the food of your household
and maintenance for your girls.
PROVERBS 28 c The wicked flee when no one pursues,
but d the righteous are bold as a lion.
2[†] When a land transgresses, e it has many rulers,
but with a man of understanding and knowledge,
its stability will long continue.
3 f A poor man who oppresses the poor
is a beating rain that leaves no food.
4 Those who forsake the law g praise the wicked,
but those who keep the law h strive against them.
5[†] Evil men i do not understand justice,
but those who seek the LORD j understand it completely.
6
k Better is a poor man who l walks in his integrity
than a rich man who is l crooked in his ways.
7 The one who keeps the law is a son with understanding,
but m a companion of gluttons shames his father.
8 Whoever multiplies his wealth n by interest and profit [1]
o gathers it for him who is p generous to the poor.
9[†] If one turns away his ear from hearing the law,
even his q prayer is an abomination.
10 Whoever misleads the upright into an evil way
r will fall into his own pit,
but the blameless s will have a goodly inheritance.
11 A rich man is wise in his t own eyes,
but a poor man who has understanding u will find him out.
12 When v the righteous triumph, there is great glory,
but when w the wicked rise, people hide themselves.
13[†] Whoever x conceals his transgressions will not prosper,
but he who y confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy.
14 Blessed is the one who z fears the LORD always,
but whoever a hardens his heart will fall into calamity.
15[†] Like b a roaring lion or c a charging bear
is d a wicked ruler over a poor people.
16 A ruler who e lacks understanding is a cruel oppressor,
but he who hates unjust gain will prolong his days.
17[†] If one is burdened with f the blood of another,
he will be a fugitive until death; [2]
let no one help him.
18 g Whoever h walks in integrity will be delivered,
but he who is crooked in his ways will suddenly fall.
19[†] i Whoever works his land will have plenty of bread,
but he who follows worthless pursuits will have plenty of poverty.
20 A faithful man will abound with blessings,
but whoever hastens to be rich j will not go unpunished.
21 To show k partiality is not good,
but for l a piece of bread a man will do wrong.
22 A m stingy man [3] n hastens after wealth
and does not know that o poverty will come upon him.
23 Whoever p rebukes a man will afterward find more favor
than q he who flatters with his tongue.
24 Whoever robs his father or his mother
and says, “That is no transgression,”
is r a companion to a man who destroys.
25 A greedy man s stirs up strife,
but the one who trusts in the LORD will t be enriched.
26 Whoever u trusts in his own mind is a fool,
but he who walks in wisdom will be delivered.
27 Whoever v gives to the poor will not want,
but he who w hides his eyes will get many a curse.
28 When x the wicked rise, y people hide themselves,
but when they perish, the righteous increase.
PROVERBS 29 z He who is often reproved, yet stiffens his neck,
will suddenly be a broken b beyond healing.
2 When c the righteous increase, the people rejoice,
but when d the wicked rule, the people groan.
3[†] He who e loves wisdom makes his father glad,
but f a companion of prostitutes g squanders his wealth.
4 By justice a king h builds up the land,
but he who exacts gifts [1] tears it down.
5 i A man who flatters his neighbor
spreads j a net for his feet.
6 An evil man is k ensnared in his transgression,
but a righteous man l sings and rejoices.
7[†] A righteous man m knows the rights of the poor;
a wicked man does not n understand such knowledge.
8 o Scoffers set a city aflame,
but the wise turn away wrath.
9 If a wise man has an argument with a fool,
the fool only rages and laughs, and there is p no quiet.
10 Bloodthirsty men q hate one who is blameless
and seek the life of the upright. [2]
11 A fool gives full vent to his spirit,
but a wise man quietly holds it back.
12[†] If a ruler listens to falsehood,
all his officials will be wicked.
13 The poor man and the oppressor r meet together;
the LORD s gives light to the eyes of both.
14 If a king t faithfully judges the poor,
his throne will u be established forever.
15[†] v The rod and reproof give wisdom,
but a child left to himself w brings shame to his mother.
16 When the wicked increase, transgression increases,
but x the righteous will look upon their downfall.
17
y Discipline your son, and he will give you rest;
he will give delight to your heart.
18 Where z there is no prophetic vision the people a cast off restraint, [3]
but blessed is he who b keeps the law.
19 By mere words a servant is not disciplined,
for though he understands, he will not respond.
20 Do you see a man who is hasty in his words?
c There is more hope for a fool than for him.
21 Whoever pampers his servant from childhood
will in the end find him his heir. [4]
22 d A man of wrath stirs up strife,
and one given to anger causes much transgression.
23
e One’s pride will bring him low,
f but he who is lowly in spirit will obtain honor.
24[†] The partner of a thief g hates his own life;
h he hears the curse, but discloses nothing.
25[†] i The fear of man lays a snare,
but whoever trusts in the LORD is safe.
26 Many j seek the face of a ruler,
but it is from the LORD that a man k gets justice.
27[†] l An unjust man is an abomination to the righteous,
but one whose way is straight is an abomination to the wicked.
The Words of Agur