PROVERBS 15 [†] d A soft answer turns away wrath,
but e a harsh word stirs up anger.
2 The tongue of the wise commends knowledge,
but f the mouths of fools pour out folly.
3[†] g The eyes of the LORD are in every place,
keeping watch on the evil and the good.
4 h A gentle [1] tongue is i a tree of life,
but j perverseness in it breaks the spirit.
5[†] k A fool l despises his father’s instruction,
but m whoever heeds reproof is prudent.
6 In the house of the righteous there is much treasure,
but trouble befalls the income of the wicked.
7
n The lips of the wise spread knowledge;
n not so the hearts of fools. [2]
8[†] o The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD,
but p the prayer of the upright is acceptable to him.
9 The way of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD,
but he loves him q who pursues righteousness.
10 There is r severe discipline for him who forsakes the way;
s whoever hates reproof will die.
11 Sheol and Abaddon lie open before the LORD;
how much more t the hearts of the children of man!
12
u A scoffer v does not like to be reproved;
he will not go to the wise.
13[†] w A glad heart makes a cheerful face,
but by x sorrow of heart the spirit is y crushed.
14
z The heart of him who has understanding seeks knowledge,
but the mouths of fools feed on folly.
15 All the days of the afflicted are evil,
but a the cheerful of heart has a continual feast.
16[†] b Better is a little with the fear of the LORD
than great treasure and trouble with it.
17 c Better is a dinner of herbs where love is
than d a fattened ox and hatred with it.
18
e A hot-tempered man f stirs up strife,
but he who is g slow to anger quiets contention.
19[†] The way of h a sluggard is like a hedge of i thorns,
but the path of the upright is j a level highway.
20[†] k A wise son makes a glad father,
but a foolish man despises his mother.
21
l Folly is a joy to him who lacks sense,
but a man of understanding m walks straight ahead.
22 n Without counsel plans fail,
but with many advisers they succeed.
23 To make an apt answer is a joy to a man,
and o a word in season, how good it is!
24 The path of life leads upward p for the prudent,
that he may turn away from Sheol beneath.
25[†] The LORD tears down the house of q the proud
but r maintains s the widow’s boundaries.
26
t The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the LORD,
but u gracious words are pure.
27 Whoever is v greedy for unjust gain w troubles his own household,
but he who hates x bribes will live.
28 The heart of the righteous y ponders how to answer,
but z the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things.
29 The LORD is a far from the wicked,
but he b hears the prayer of the righteous.
30 c The light of the eyes rejoices the heart,
and d good news refreshes [3] the bones.
31 e The ear that listens to f life-giving reproof
will dwell among the wise.
32 Whoever g ignores instruction h despises himself,
but he who listens to reproof i gains intelligence.
33 j The fear of the LORD is instruction in wisdom,
and k humility comes before honor.