PROVERBS 16 [†] The plans of the heart belong to man,
but l the answer of the tongue is from the LORD.
2 m All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes,
but the LORD n weighs the spirit.
3 o Commit your work to the LORD,
and your plans will be established.
4 p The LORD has made everything for its purpose,
even q the wicked for the day of trouble.
5 Everyone who is arrogant in heart is r an abomination to the LORD;
s be assured, he will not go unpunished.
6[†] By t steadfast love and faithfulness iniquity is atoned for,
and by u the fear of the LORD one v turns away from evil.
7 When a man’s ways please the LORD,
w he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
8 x Better is a little with righteousness
than great revenues with injustice.
9 y The heart of man plans his way,
but z the LORD establishes his steps.
10[†] a An oracle is on the lips of a king;
his mouth does not sin in judgment.
11 b A just balance and scales are the LORD’s;
all the weights in the bag are his work.
12 It is an abomination to kings to do evil,
for c the throne is established by righteousness.
13 d Righteous lips are the delight of a king,
and he loves him who speaks what is right.
14
e A king’s wrath is a messenger of death,
and a wise man will f appease it.
15 g In the light of a king’s face there is life,
and his d favor is like h the clouds that bring the spring rain.
16[†] i How much better to get wisdom than j gold!
To get understanding is to be chosen rather than k silver.
17 The highway of the upright l turns aside from evil;
whoever guards his way preserves his life.
18 m Pride goes before destruction,
and a haughty spirit before a fall.
19 n It is better to be of a lowly spirit with the poor
than to o divide the spoil with the proud.
20[†] Whoever gives thought to the word [1] p will discover good,
and blessed is he q who trusts in the LORD.
21 The wise of heart is called discerning,
and sweetness of speech r increases persuasiveness.
22 Good sense is s a fountain of life to him who has it,
but the instruction of fools is folly.
23 t The heart of the wise makes his speech judicious
and adds persuasiveness to his lips.
24 u Gracious words are like v a honeycomb,
sweetness to the soul and w health to the body.
25[†] There is a way that seems right to a man,
but its end is the way to death. [2]
26 A worker’s appetite works for him;
his x mouth urges him on.
27 y A worthless man plots evil,
and his speech [3] is like z a scorching fire.
28
a A dishonest man spreads strife,
and b a whisperer c separates close friends.
29 A man of violence d entices his neighbor
and leads him in a way that is not good.
30 Whoever winks his eyes plans [4] e dishonest things;
he who f purses his lips brings evil to pass.
31 g Gray hair is h a crown of glory;
it i is gained in a righteous life.
32 j Whoever is slow to anger is better than the mighty,
and he who rules his spirit than he who takes a city.
33 k The lot is cast into the lap,
but its every decision is l from the LORD.