PROVERBS 30 [†]The words of Agur son of Jakeh. The oracle. [1]
The man declares, I am weary, O God;
I am weary, O God, and worn out. [2]
2[†] Surely I am too m stupid to be a man.
I have not the understanding of a man.
3 I have not learned wisdom,
nor have I knowledge of n the Holy One.
4 Who has o ascended to heaven and come down?
Who has p gathered the wind in his fists?
Who has q wrapped up the waters in a garment?
Who has established all r the ends of the earth?
s What is his name, and what is his son’s name?
Surely you know!
5[†] t Every word of God proves true;
he is u a shield to those who take refuge in him.
6 v Do not add to his words,
lest he rebuke you and you be found a liar.
7[†] Two things I ask of you;
deny them not to me w before I die:
8 Remove far from me falsehood and lying;
give me neither poverty nor riches;
feed me with the food that is x needful for me,
9 lest I be y full and z deny you
and say, a “Who is the LORD?”
or lest I be poor and steal
b and profane the name of my God.
10 c Do not slander a servant to his master,
d lest he curse you, and you be held guilty.
11 There are those [3] who e curse their fathers
and do not bless their mothers.
12 There are those who are f clean in their own eyes
but are not washed of their filth.
13 There are those—how g lofty are their eyes,
how high their eyelids lift!
14 There are those whose teeth are h swords,
whose i fangs are knives,
to j devour the poor from off the earth,
the needy from among mankind.
15[†] The leech has two daughters:
Give and Give. [4]
k Three things are never satisfied;
k four never say, “Enough”:
16
l Sheol, m the barren womb,
the land never satisfied with water,
and the fire that never says, “Enough.”
17[†] The eye that n mocks a father
and o scorns to obey a mother
will p be picked out by q the ravens of the valley
and eaten by the vultures.
18[†] k Three things are r too wonderful for me;
k four I do not understand:
19 the way of an eagle in the sky,
the way of a serpent on a rock,
the way of a ship on the high seas,
and the way of a man with a virgin.
20 This is the way of an adulteress:
she eats and wipes her mouth
and says, “I have done no wrong.”
21[†] Under k three things s the earth trembles;
under k four it cannot bear up:
22 t a slave when he becomes king,
and a fool when he is u filled with food;
23
v an unloved woman when she w gets a husband,
and a maidservant when she displaces her mistress.
24 k Four things on earth are small,
but they are exceedingly wise:
25
x the ants are a people not strong,
yet they provide their food in the summer;
26 y the rock badgers are a people not mighty,
yet they make their homes in the cliffs;
27 the locusts have no z king,
yet all of them march in a rank;
28 the lizard you can take in your hands,
yet it is in kings’ palaces.
29[†] b Three things are stately in their tread;
b four are stately in their stride:
30 the lion, which is mightiest among beasts
and c does not turn back before any;
31 the d strutting rooster, [5] the he-goat,
and a king whose army is with him. [6]
32 If you have been foolish, exalting yourself,
or if you have been devising evil,
e put your hand on your mouth.
33 For pressing milk produces curds,
pressing the nose produces blood,
and pressing anger produces strife.
The Words of King Lemuel