PSALM 35 [†] Contend, O LORD, with those who y contend with me;
z fight against those who fight against me!
2 Take hold of a shield and buckler
and rise for my help!
3 Draw the spear and javelin [1]
against my pursuers!
Say to my soul,
“I am your salvation!”
4[†] b Let them be c put to shame and dishonor
who seek after my life!
Let them be d turned back and disappointed
who devise evil against me!
5 Let them be like e chaff before the wind,
with the angel of the LORD driving them away!
6 Let their way be dark and f slippery,
with the angel of the LORD pursuing them!
7 For g without cause h they hid their net for me;
without cause they dug i a pit for my life. [2]
8 Let j destruction come upon him k when he does not know it!
And let the net that he hid ensnare him;
let him fall into it—to his destruction!
9[†] Then my soul will rejoice in the LORD,
l exulting in his salvation.
10 All my m bones shall say,
“O LORD, n who is like you,
delivering the poor
from him who is too strong for him,
the poor and needy from him who robs him?”
11 o Malicious [3] witnesses rise up;
they ask me of things that I do not know.
12
p They repay me evil for good;
my soul is bereft. [4]
13 But I, q when they were sick—
I r wore sackcloth;
I s afflicted myself with fasting;
I prayed t with head bowed [5] on my chest.
14 I went about as though I grieved for my friend or my brother;
as one who laments his mother,
I u bowed down in mourning.
15 But at my stumbling they rejoiced and gathered;
they gathered together against me;
v wretches whom I did not know
tore at me without ceasing;
16 like profane mockers at a feast, [6]
they w gnash at me with their teeth.
17 How long, O Lord, will you x look on?
Rescue me from their destruction,
y my precious life from the lions!
18 I will thank you in z the great congregation;
in the mighty throng I will praise you.
19[†] a Let not those rejoice over me
who are b wrongfully my foes,
and let not those c wink the eye
who d hate me e without cause.
20 For they do not speak peace,
but against those who are quiet in the land
they devise words of deceit.
21 They f open wide their mouths against me;
they say, g “Aha, Aha!
Our eyes have seen it!”
22[†] h You have seen, O LORD; i be not silent!
O Lord, j be not far from me!
23 Awake and k rouse yourself for l my vindication,
for my cause, my God and my Lord!
24 m Vindicate me, O LORD, my God,
according to your righteousness,
and n let them not rejoice over me!
25 Let them not say in their hearts,
o “Aha, our heart’s desire!”
Let them not say, p “We have swallowed him up.”
26 Let them be q put to shame and disappointed altogether
who rejoice at my calamity!
Let them be r clothed with shame and dishonor
who s magnify themselves against me!
27[†] Let those who delight in my righteousness
shout for joy and be glad
t and say evermore,
u “Great is the LORD,
who v delights in the welfare of his servant!”
28 Then my w tongue shall tell of your righteousness
and of your praise all the day long.
How Precious Is Your Steadfast Love
To the choirmaster. Of David, the x servant of the LORD.