PSALM 109 [†] t Be not silent, O u God of my praise!
2 For wicked and v deceitful mouths are opened against me,
speaking against me with lying tongues.
3 They encircle me with words of hate,
and attack me w without cause.
4 In return for my love they x accuse me,
but I y give myself to prayer. [1]
5[†] So they z reward me evil for good,
and hatred for my love.
6[†] a Appoint a wicked man b against him;
let an accuser stand c at his right hand.
7 When he is tried, let him come forth guilty;
let his d prayer be counted as sin!
8[†] May his e days be few;
may f another take his g office!
9[†] May his h children be fatherless
and his wife a widow!
10 May his children i wander about and beg,
j seeking food far from the ruins they inhabit!
11 May k the creditor seize all that he has;
may k strangers plunder the fruits of his toil!
12 Let there be none to l extend kindness to him,
nor any to m pity his fatherless children!
13 May his n posterity be cut off;
may his o name be blotted out in the second generation!
14 May p the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the LORD,
and let not the sin of his mother be q blotted out!
15 r Let them be before the LORD continually,
that he may s cut off the memory of them from the earth!
16[†] For he did not remember to show kindness,
but pursued t the poor and needy
and u the brokenhearted, to put them to death.
17
v He loved to curse; let curses come [2] upon him!
He did not delight in blessing; may it be far [3] from him!
18 He w clothed himself with cursing as his coat;
may it x soak [4] into his body like water,
like oil into his bones!
19 May it be like a garment that he wraps around him,
like a belt that he puts on every day!
20 May this be the reward of my y accusers from the LORD,
of those who speak evil against my life!
21[†] But you, O GOD my Lord,
deal on my behalf z for your name’s sake;
because your a steadfast love is good, deliver me!
22 For I am b poor and needy,
and my heart is stricken within me.
23 I am gone like c a shadow at evening;
I am d shaken off like a locust.
24 My knees are weak e through fasting;
my f body has become gaunt, with no fat.
25 I am g an object of scorn to my accusers;
when they see me, they h wag their heads.
26
i Help me, O LORD my God!
Save me according to your steadfast love!
27 Let them j know that this is your hand;
you, O LORD, have done it!
28 k Let them curse, but you will bless!
They arise and are put to shame, but l your servant will be glad!
29 May my accusers be m clothed with dishonor;
may they n be wrapped in their own shame as in a cloak!
30[†] With my mouth I will give great thanks to the LORD;
I will o praise him in the midst of the throng.
31 For he stands p at the right hand of the needy one,
to save him from those who condemn his soul to death.
Sit at My Right Hand
A Psalm of David.