PSALM 104 [†] l Bless the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD my God, you are m very great!
n You are clothed with splendor and majesty,
2 covering yourself with light as with a garment,
o stretching out the heavens p like a tent.
3 He q lays the beams of his r chambers on the waters;
he makes s the clouds his chariot;
he rides on t the wings of the wind;
4 he u makes his messengers winds,
his v ministers w a flaming fire.
5[†] He x set the earth on its foundations,
so that it should never be moved.
6 You y covered it with the deep as with a garment;
the waters stood above the mountains.
7 At z your rebuke they fled;
at a the sound of your thunder they b took to flight.
8 The mountains rose, the valleys sank down
to the place that you c appointed for them.
9 You set d a boundary that they may not pass,
so that they e might not again cover the earth.
10[†] You make springs gush forth in the valleys;
they flow between the hills;
11 they f give drink to every beast of the field;
the wild donkeys quench their thirst.
12 Beside them the birds of the heavens dwell;
they sing among the branches.
13 g From your lofty abode you h water the mountains;
the earth is satisfied with the fruit of your work.
14[†] You cause i the grass to grow for the livestock
and j plants for man to cultivate,
that he may bring forth k food from the earth
15[†] and l wine to gladden the heart of man,
m oil to make his face shine
and bread to n strengthen man’s heart.
16 The trees of the LORD are watered abundantly,
o the cedars of Lebanon p that he planted.
17 In them the birds build their nests;
the stork has her home in the fir trees.
18 The high mountains are for q the wild goats;
the rocks are a refuge for r the rock badgers.
19[†] He made the moon to mark the s seasons; [1]
the sun knows its time for setting.
20
t You make darkness, and it is night,
when all the beasts of the forest creep about.
21 u The young lions roar for their prey,
seeking their food from God.
22 When the sun rises, they steal away
and lie down in their v dens.
23 w Man goes out to his work
and to his labor until the evening.
24 O LORD, how manifold are your works!
In x wisdom have you made them all;
the earth is full of your creatures.
25[†] Here is the sea, great and wide,
y which teems with creatures innumerable,
living things both small and great.
26 There go the ships,
and z Leviathan, which you formed to a play in it. [2]
27[†] These b all look to you,
to c give them their food in due season.
28 When you give it to them, they gather it up;
when you d open your hand, they are filled with good things.
29 When you e hide your face, they are f dismayed;
when you g take away their breath, they die
and h return to their dust.
30 When you i send forth your Spirit, [3] they are created,
and you j renew the face of the ground.
31[†] May the glory of the LORD k endure forever;
may the LORD l rejoice in his works,
32 who looks on the earth and it m trembles,
who n touches the mountains and they smoke!
33 I will sing to the LORD o as long as I live;
I will sing praise to my God while I have being.
34 May my p meditation be pleasing to him,
for I rejoice in the LORD.
35 Let q sinners be consumed from the earth,
and let the wicked be no more!
r Bless the LORD, O my soul!
s Praise the LORD!
Tell of All His Wonderful Works