PSALM 31 [†] o In you, O LORD, do I p take refuge;
q let me never be put to shame;
in your r righteousness deliver me!
2 Incline your ear to me;
rescue me speedily!
Be s a rock of t refuge for me,
a strong fortress to save me!
3 For you are my rock and my fortress;
and for your u name’s sake you lead me and guide me;
4 you v take me out of w the net they have hidden for me,
for you are my x refuge.
5[†] y Into your hand I commit my spirit;
you have redeemed me, O LORD, z faithful God.
6 I a hate [1] those who pay b regard to worthless c idols,
but I trust in the LORD.
7 I will rejoice and be glad in your steadfast love,
because you have seen my affliction;
you have d known the distress of my soul,
8 and you have not e delivered me into the hand of the enemy;
you have set my feet in f a broad place.
9 Be gracious to me, O LORD, for I am g in distress;
h my eye is wasted from grief;
my soul and my body also.
10[†] For my life is spent with sorrow,
and my years with sighing;
my strength fails because of my iniquity,
and i my bones waste away.
11 Because of all my adversaries I have become j a reproach,
especially to my k neighbors,
and an object of dread to my acquaintances;
those who see me in the street l flee from me.
12 I have been m forgotten like one who is dead;
I have become like n a broken vessel.
13 For I o hear the whispering of many—
terror on every side!—
p as they scheme together against me,
as they plot to take my life.
14[†] But I q trust in you, O LORD;
I say, “You are my God.”
15 My r times are in your hand;
s rescue me from the hand of my enemies and from my persecutors!
16 t Make your face shine on your servant;
save me in your steadfast love!
17 O LORD, u let me not be put to shame,
for I call upon you;
let the wicked be put to shame;
let them go v silently to Sheol.
18 Let the lying lips be mute,
which w speak x insolently against the righteous
in pride and contempt.
19[†] Oh, how abundant is your goodness,
which you have stored up for those who fear you
and worked for those who take refuge in you,
y in the sight of the children of mankind!
20 In z the cover of your presence you hide them
from the plots of men;
you a store them in your shelter
from the strife of tongues.
21 Blessed be the LORD,
for he has wondrously b shown his steadfast love to me
when I was in c a besieged city.
22 I had said in my d alarm, [2]
“I am e cut off from f your sight.”
But you heard the voice of my pleas for mercy
when I cried to you for help.
23 Love the LORD, all you his g saints!
The LORD preserves the faithful
but abundantly h repays the one who acts in pride.
24 i Be strong, and let your heart take courage,
all you who wait for the LORD!
Blessed Are the Forgiven
A Maskil [1] of David.