PSALM 74 [†] O God, why do you s cast us off forever?
Why does your anger t smoke against u the sheep of your pasture?
2 v Remember your congregation, which you have w purchased of old,
which you have x redeemed to be y the tribe of your heritage!
Remember Mount Zion, z where you have dwelt.
3 Direct your steps to a the perpetual ruins;
the enemy has destroyed everything in the sanctuary!
4[†] Your foes have b roared in the midst of your meeting place;
c they set up their d own signs for e signs.
5 They were like those who swing f axes
in a forest of trees. [2]
6 And all its g carved wood
they broke down with hatchets and hammers.
7 They h set your sanctuary on fire;
they i profaned j the dwelling place of your name,
bringing it down to the ground.
8 They k said to themselves, “We will utterly subdue them”;
they burned all the meeting places of God in the land.
9[†] We do not see our l signs;
m there is no longer any prophet,
and there is none among us who knows how long.
10 How long, O God, n is the foe to scoff?
Is the enemy to revile your name forever?
11 Why o do you hold back your hand, your right hand?
Take it from the fold of your garment [3] and destroy them!
12[†] Yet p God my King is from of old,
working salvation in the midst of the earth.
13 You q divided the sea by your might;
you r broke the heads of s the sea monsters [4] on the waters.
14[†] You crushed the heads of t Leviathan;
you gave him as food for the creatures of the wilderness.
15 You u split open springs and brooks;
you v dried up ever-flowing streams.
16 Yours is the day, yours also the night;
you have established w the heavenly lights and the sun.
17 You have x fixed all the boundaries of the earth;
you have made y summer and winter.
18[†] z Remember this, O LORD, how the enemy scoffs,
and a a foolish people reviles your name.
19 Do not deliver the soul of your b dove to the wild beasts;
c do not forget the life of your poor forever.
20 Have regard for d the covenant,
for e the dark places of the land are full of the habitations of
violence.
21 Let not f the downtrodden g turn back in shame;
let h the poor and needy praise your name.
22 Arise, O God, i defend your cause;
j remember how the foolish scoff at you all the day!
23 Do not forget the clamor of your foes,
k the uproar of those who rise against you, which goes up
continually!
God Will Judge with Equity
To the choirmaster: according to l Do Not Destroy. m A Psalm of Asaph. A Song.