PSALM 105 [†] t Oh give thanks to the LORD; u call upon his name;
v make known his deeds among the peoples!
2 Sing to him, sing praises to him;
w tell of all his wondrous works!
3 Glory in his holy name;
let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice!
4 Seek the LORD and his x strength;
y seek his presence continually!
5 Remember the z wondrous works that he has done,
his miracles, and a the judgments he uttered,
6 O offspring of b Abraham, his servant,
children of Jacob, his c chosen ones!
7[†] He is the LORD our God;
his d judgments are in all the earth.
8[†] He e remembers his covenant forever,
the word that he commanded, for f a thousand generations,
9 g the covenant that he made with Abraham,
his h sworn promise to Isaac,
10[†] which he confirmed to i Jacob as a statute,
to Israel as an everlasting covenant,
11 saying, j “To you I will give the land of Canaan
as k your portion for an inheritance.”
12[†] When they were l few in number,
of little account, and m sojourners in it,
13 wandering from nation to nation,
from one kingdom to another people,
14 he n allowed no one to oppress them;
he o rebuked kings on their account,
15[†] saying, p “Touch not my anointed ones,
do my prophets no harm!”
16[†] When he q summoned a famine on the land
and r broke all supply [1] of bread,
17 he had s sent a man ahead of them,
Joseph, who was t sold as a slave.
18 His u feet were hurt with fetters;
his neck was put in a collar of iron;
19 until v what he had said came to pass,
the word of the LORD w tested him.
20
x The king sent and y released him;
the ruler of the peoples set him free;
21 he z made him lord of his house
and ruler of all his possessions,
22 to bind [2] his princes at his pleasure
and to teach his elders wisdom.
23 Then a Israel came to Egypt;
Jacob b sojourned in c the land of Ham.
24[†] And the LORD d made his people very fruitful
and made them stronger than their foes.
25 He e turned their hearts to hate his people,
to f deal craftily with his servants.
26 He g sent Moses, his servant,
and Aaron, h whom he had chosen.
27 i They performed his signs among them
and miracles in c the land of Ham.
28 He j sent darkness, and made the land dark;
they k did not rebel [3] against his words.
29 He turned their waters into blood
and l caused their fish to die.
30 Their land swarmed with frogs,
even in m the chambers of their kings.
31 He spoke, and there came n swarms of flies,
o and gnats throughout their country.
32 He gave them hail for rain,
and fiery p lightning bolts through their land.
33 He struck down their vines and fig trees,
and q shattered the trees of their country.
34 He spoke, and the r locusts came,
young locusts without number,
35 which devoured all the vegetation in their land
and ate up the fruit of their ground.
36[†] He s struck down all the firstborn in their land,
s the firstfruits of all their strength.
37 Then he brought out Israel with t silver and gold,
and there was none among his tribes who stumbled.
38 u Egypt was glad when they departed,
for v dread of them had fallen upon it.
39 He w spread a cloud for a covering,
and fire to give light by night.
40 x They asked, and he y brought quail,
and gave them z bread from heaven in abundance.
41 He opened the rock, and a water gushed out;
it flowed through b the desert like a river.
42[†] For he c remembered his holy promise,
and d Abraham, his servant.
43 So he brought his people out with joy,
his d chosen ones with e singing.
44 And he f gave them the lands of the nations,
and they took possession of the fruit of the peoples’ toil,
45 that they might g keep his statutes
and h observe his laws.
i Praise the LORD!
Give Thanks to the LORD, for He Is Good