PSALM 50 [†] o The Mighty One, God the LORD,
speaks and summons the earth
p from the rising of the sun to its setting.
2 Out of Zion, q the perfection of beauty,
r God shines forth.
3 Our God comes; he s does not keep silence; [1]
before him is a devouring t fire,
around him a mighty tempest.
4
u He calls to the heavens above
and to the earth, that he may judge his people:
5 “Gather to me my faithful ones,
who made v a covenant with me by sacrifice!”
6
w The heavens declare his righteousness,
for x God himself is judge! Selah
7[†] y “Hear, O my people, and I will speak;
O Israel, I will testify against you.
z I am God, your God.
8 Not for your sacrifices a do I rebuke you;
your burnt offerings are continually before me.
9 I will not accept a bull from your house
or goats from your folds.
10 For every beast of the forest is mine,
the cattle on a thousand hills.
11 b I know all the birds of the hills,
and all that moves in the field is mine.
12 “If I were hungry, I would not tell you,
c for the world and its fullness are mine.
13 Do I eat the flesh of bulls
or drink the blood of goats?
14
d Offer to God a sacrifice of thanksgiving, [2]
and e perform your vows to the Most High,
15 and f call upon me in the day of trouble;
I will g deliver you, and you shall h glorify me.”
16[†] But to the wicked God says:
“What right have you to recite my statutes
or take my covenant on your lips?
17 i For you hate discipline,
j and you cast my words behind you.
18 If you see a thief, k you are pleased with him,
l and you keep company with adulterers.
19 “You give your mouth free rein for evil,
m and your tongue frames deceit.
20 You sit and speak against your brother;
you slander your own mother’s son.
21 These things you have done, and I n have been silent;
you thought that I [3] was one like yourself.
But now I o rebuke you and p lay the charge before you.
22 “Mark this, then, you who q forget God,
lest I tear you apart, and there be r none to deliver!
23[†] The one who s offers thanksgiving as his sacrifice glorifies me;
to one who t orders his way rightly
I will show the u salvation of God!”
Create in Me a Clean Heart, O God
To the choirmaster. A Psalm of David, when v Nathan the prophet went to him, after he had gone in
to Bathsheba.