REVELATION 11 [†]Then I was given m a measuring rod like a staff, and I
was told, “Rise and measure the temple of God and the altar and those who
worship there, 2but do not measure n the court outside the temple; leave that
out, for o it is given over to the nations, and they will trample the holy city
for p forty-two months. 3[†]And I will grant authority to my two witnesses,
and they will prophesy for p 1,260 days, q clothed in sackcloth.”
4[†]These are r the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand
before the Lord of the earth. 5[†]And if anyone would harm them, s fire
pours from their mouth and consumes their foes. If anyone would harm
them, t this is how he is doomed to be killed. 6They have the power u to
shut the sky, that no rain may fall during the days of their prophesying, and
they have power over the waters to turn them into blood and v to strike the
earth with every kind of plague, as often as they desire. 7[†]And when they
have finished their testimony, w the beast that rises from x the bottomless
pit [1] y will make war on them and conquer them and kill them, 8and their
dead bodies will lie in the street of the great city that symbolically [2] is
called z Sodom and a Egypt, where their Lord was crucified. 9For three and
a half days some from the peoples and tribes and languages and nations will
gaze at their dead bodies and b refuse to let them be placed in a tomb, 10and
c those who dwell on the earth will rejoice over them and make merry and
d exchange presents, because these two prophets e had been a torment to
those who dwell on the earth. 11[†]But after the three and a half days f a
breath of life from God entered them, and they stood up on their feet, and
great fear fell on those who saw them. 12Then they heard a loud voice from
heaven saying to them, g “Come up here!” And h they went up to heaven
i in a cloud, and their enemies watched them. 13And at that hour there was
j a great earthquake, and k a tenth of the city fell. Seven thousand people
were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified and l gave glory to
m the God of heaven.
14
n The second woe has passed; behold, the third woe is soon to come.
The Seventh Trumpet
15[†]Then o the seventh angel blew his trumpet, and p there were loud
voices in heaven, saying, q “The kingdom of the world has become the
kingdom of our Lord and of r his Christ, and s he shall reign forever and
ever.” 16And the twenty-four elders t who sit on their thrones before God
u fell on their faces and worshiped God, 17saying,
“We give thanks to you, Lord God Almighty,
v who is and who was,
for you have taken your great power
and w begun to reign.
18 The nations raged,
but x your wrath came,
and y the time for the dead to be judged,
and for rewarding your servants, [3] the prophets and saints,
and z those who fear your name,
both small and great,
and a for destroying the destroyers of the earth.”
19[†]Then b God’s temple in heaven was opened, and c the ark of his
covenant was seen within his temple. There were flashes of lightning,
rumblings, [4] peals of thunder, an earthquake, and d heavy hail.
The Woman and the Dragon