REVELATION 18 [†]After this I saw n another angel coming down from
heaven, having great authority, and o the earth was made bright with his
glory.
2And he called out with a mighty voice,
p “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great!
She has become q a dwelling place for demons,
a haunt r for every unclean spirit,
a haunt s for every unclean bird,
a haunt for every unclean and detestable beast.
3 For all nations have drunk [1]
t the wine of the passion of her sexual immorality,
and u the kings of the earth have committed immorality with her,
and v the merchants of the earth have grown rich from the power of
her luxurious living.”
4[†]Then I heard another voice from heaven saying,
w “Come out of her, my people,
lest you take part in her sins,
lest you share in her plagues;
5 for x her sins are heaped high as heaven,
and y God has remembered her iniquities.
6[†] z Pay her back as she herself has paid back others,
and repay her a double for her deeds;
mix a double portion for her b in the cup she mixed.
7[†] c As she glorified herself and lived in luxury,
so give her a like measure of torment and mourning,
since in her heart she says,
d ‘I sit as a queen,
I am no widow,
and mourning I shall never see.’
8 For this reason her plagues will come e in a single day,
death and mourning and famine,
and f she will be burned up with fire;
for g mighty is the Lord God who has judged her.”
9[†]And h the kings of the earth, who committed sexual immorality and
lived in luxury with her, i will weep and wail over her j when they see the
smoke of her burning. 10 k They will stand far off, in fear of her torment, and
say,
“Alas! Alas! l You great city,
you mighty city, Babylon!
For m in a single hour your judgment has come.”
11And n the merchants of the earth weep and mourn for her, since no one
buys their cargo anymore, 12[†]cargo of gold, silver, jewels, pearls, fine
linen, purple cloth, silk, scarlet cloth, all kinds of scented wood, all kinds of
articles of ivory, all kinds of articles of costly wood, bronze, iron and
marble, 13cinnamon, spice, incense, myrrh, frankincense, wine, oil, fine
flour, wheat, cattle and sheep, horses and chariots, and slaves, that is,
human souls. [2]
14 “The fruit for which your soul longed
has gone from you,
and all your delicacies and your splendors
are lost to you,
never to be found again!”
15 o The merchants of these wares, who gained wealth from her, p will stand
far off, in fear of her torment, weeping and mourning aloud,
16 “Alas, alas, for the great city
q that was clothed in fine linen,
in purple and scarlet,
adorned with gold,
with jewels, and with pearls!
17 For r in a single hour all this wealth s has been laid waste.”
And t all shipmasters and seafaring men, sailors and all whose trade is on
the sea, stood far off 18and u cried out v as they saw the smoke of her
burning,
w “What city was like the great city?”
19And they threw x dust on their heads as they wept and mourned, crying
out,
“Alas, alas, for the great city
y where all who had ships at sea
grew rich by her wealth!
For z in a single hour she has been laid waste.
20[†] a Rejoice over her, O heaven,
and you saints and b apostles and prophets,
for c God has given judgment for you against her!”
21[†]Then d a mighty angel e took up a stone like a great millstone and
threw it into the sea, saying,
“So will Babylon f the great city be thrown down with violence,
and will be found no more;
22 and g the sound of harpists and musicians, of flute players and
trumpeters,
will be heard in you no more,
and a craftsman of any craft
will be found in you no more,
and h the sound of the mill
will be heard in you no more,
23 and the light of a lamp
will shine in you no more,
and i the voice of bridegroom and bride
will be heard in you no more,
for j your merchants were the great ones of the earth,
and all nations were deceived k by your sorcery.
24[†] And l in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints,
and of m all who have been slain on earth.”
Rejoicing in Heaven