REVELATION 8 [†]When the Lamb opened u the seventh seal, there was
silence in heaven for about half an hour.
2[†]Then I saw the seven angels
v who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. 3[†]And
another angel came and stood w at the altar with a golden censer, and he
was given much incense to offer with x the prayers of all the saints on y the
golden altar before the throne, 4and z the smoke of the incense, with the
prayers of the saints, rose before God from the hand of the angel. 5Then the
angel took the censer and a filled it with fire from the altar and threw it on
the earth, and b there were peals of c thunder, rumblings, [1] flashes of
lightning, and an earthquake.
The Seven Trumpets
6[†]Now the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared to blow
them.
7The first angel blew his trumpet, and there followed d hail and e fire,
mixed with blood, and these were thrown upon the earth. And a f third of
the earth was burned up, and a third of g the trees were burned up, and all
green grass was burned up.
8[†]The second angel blew his trumpet, and something like h a great
mountain, burning with fire, was thrown into the sea, and a third of the sea
i became blood. 9A third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third
of j the ships were destroyed.
10[†]The third angel blew his trumpet, and k a great star fell from heaven,
blazing like a torch, and it fell on a third of the rivers and on l the springs of
water.
11The name of the star is Wormwood. [2] A third of the waters
m became wormwood, and many people died from the water, n because it
had been made bitter.
12[†]The fourth angel blew his trumpet, and a third of o the sun was
struck, and a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of
their light might be darkened, and a third of the day might be kept from
shining, and likewise a third of the night.
13[†]Then I looked, and I heard an eagle crying with a loud voice as it
flew directly overhead, p “Woe, woe, woe to those who dwell on the earth,
at the blasts of the other trumpets that the three angels are about to blow!”