REVELATION 6 [†]Now I watched when the Lamb opened one of e the seven
seals, and I heard f one of the four living creatures say g with a voice like
thunder, h “Come!” 2And I looked, and behold, i a white horse! And j its
rider had a bow, and k a crown was given to him, and he came out
l conquering, and to conquer.
3[†]When he opened the second seal, I heard m the second living creature
say, “Come!” 4And out came another horse, n bright red. Its rider was
permitted o to take peace from the earth, so that people should slay one
another, and he was given a great sword.
5[†]When he opened the third seal, I heard the m third living creature say,
“Come!” And I looked, and behold, p a black horse! And its rider had a pair
of scales in his hand. 6And I heard what seemed to be a voice in the midst
of the four living creatures, saying, q “A quart [1] of wheat for a denarius, [2]
and three quarts of barley for a denarius, and r do not harm the oil and
wine!”
7[†]When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of m the fourth
living creature say, “Come!” 8And I looked, and behold, s a pale horse! And
its rider’s name was Death, and Hades followed him. And they were given
authority over a fourth of the earth, to kill t with sword and with famine and
with pestilence and u by wild beasts of the earth.
9[†]When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under v the altar w the souls of
those who had been slain x for the word of God and for y the witness they
had borne. 10They cried out with a loud voice, “O Sovereign Lord, z holy
and true, a how long b before you will judge and c avenge our blood on
d those who dwell on the earth?” 11Then they were each given e a white
robe and f told to rest a little longer, g until the number of their fellow
servants [3] and their brothers [4] h should be complete, who were to be
killed as they themselves had been.
12[†]When he opened the sixth seal, I looked, and behold, i there was a
great earthquake, and j the sun became black as k sackcloth, the full moon
became like blood, 13[†]and l the stars of the sky fell to the earth m as the fig
tree sheds its winter fruit when shaken by a gale. 14 n The sky vanished
m like a scroll that is being rolled up, and o every mountain and island was
removed from its place. 15Then the kings of the earth and the great ones and
the generals and the rich and the powerful, and everyone, slave [5] and free,
p hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains,
16 q calling to the mountains and rocks, “Fall on us and hide us from the face
of r him who is seated on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, 17for
s the great day of their wrath has come, and t who can stand?”
The 144,000 of Israel Sealed