ROMANS 15 [†] s We who are strong t have an obligation to bear with the
failings of the weak, and not to please ourselves. 2 u Let each of us please his
neighbor for his good, to build him up. 3For v Christ did not please himself,
but as it is written, w “The reproaches of those who reproached you fell on
me.” 4[†]For x whatever was written in former days was written for our
y instruction, that through endurance and through z the encouragement of
the Scriptures we might have hope. 5May the God of endurance and
encouragement grant you a to live in such harmony with one another, in
accord with Christ Jesus, 6that together you may with one voice glorify
b the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 7Therefore welcome one
another as Christ has welcomed you, for the glory of God.
Christ the Hope of Jews and Gentiles
8[†]For I tell you that Christ c became a servant to the circumcised to show
God’s truthfulness, in order d to confirm the promises given to the
patriarchs, 9[†]and in order e that the Gentiles might glorify God for his
mercy. As it is written,
f “Therefore I will praise you among the Gentiles,
and sing to your name.”
10And again it is said,
g “Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people.”
11And again,
h “Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles,
and let all the peoples extol him.”
12And again Isaiah says,
i j “The root of Jesse will come,
even he who arises to rule the Gentiles;
k in him will the Gentiles hope.”
13May the God of hope fill you with all l joy and peace in believing, so that
by the power of the Holy Spirit you may abound in hope.
Paul the Minister to the Gentiles
14[†] m I myself am satisfied about you, my brothers, [1] that you yourselves
are full of goodness, filled with n all knowledge and able to instruct one
another.
15But on some points I have written to you very boldly by way of
reminder, o because of the grace given me by God 16[†]to be p a minister of
Christ Jesus to the Gentiles q in the priestly service of the gospel of God, so
that r the offering of the Gentiles may be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy
Spirit. 17In Christ Jesus, then, I have s reason to be proud of t my work for
God. 18For I will not venture to speak of anything except u what Christ has
accomplished through me v to bring the Gentiles to obedience—by word
and deed, 19[†] w by the power of signs and wonders, by the power of the
Spirit of God—so that x from Jerusalem and all the way around y to
Illyricum I have fulfilled the ministry of the gospel of Christ; 20[†]and thus
I make it my ambition to preach the gospel, not where Christ has already
been named, z lest I build on someone else’s foundation, 21but as it is
written,
a “Those who have never been told of him will see,
and those who have never heard will understand.”
Paul’s Plan to Visit Rome
22[†]This is the reason why b I have so often been hindered from coming to
you. 23But now, since I no longer have any room for work in these regions,
and c since I have longed for many years to come to you, 24I hope to see
you in passing as I go d to Spain, and e to be helped on my journey there by
you, once I have enjoyed your company for a while. 25[†]At present,
however, f I am going to Jerusalem bringing aid to the saints. 26[†]For
g Macedonia and Achaia have been pleased to make some contribution for
the poor among the saints at Jerusalem. 27[†]For they were pleased to do it,
and indeed h they owe it to them. For if the Gentiles have come to share in
their spiritual blessings, they ought also to be of service to them in material
blessings. 28When therefore I have completed this and have delivered to
them what has been collected, [2] I will leave i for Spain by way of you. 29I
know that when I come to you I will come in the fullness of the blessing [3]
of Christ.
30I appeal to you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by j the love of
the Spirit, k to strive together with me in your prayers to God on my behalf,
31[†] l that I may be delivered from the unbelievers in Judea, and that m my
service for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints, 32so that by God’s
will I may come to you with joy and n be refreshed in your company.
33May
o the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
Personal Greetings