ROMANS 7 [†]Or do you not know, brothers [1]—for I am speaking to those
who know the law—that the law is binding on a person only as long as he
lives? 2For e a married woman is bound by law to her husband while he
lives, but if her husband dies she is released from the law of marriage. [2]
3Accordingly, f she will be called an adulteress if she lives with another
man while her husband is alive. But if her husband dies, she is free from
that law, and if she marries another man she is not an adulteress.
4[†]Likewise, my brothers, g you also have died h to the law i through the
body of Christ, so that you may belong to another, to him who has been
raised from the dead, j in order that we may bear fruit for God. 5[†]For
while we were living in the flesh, our sinful passions, aroused by the law,
were at work k in our members l to bear fruit for death. 6[†]But now we are
released from the law, having died to that which held us captive, so that we
serve in the m new way of n the Spirit and not in the old way of the written
code. [3]
The Law and Sin
7[†]What then shall we say? That the law is sin? By no means! Yet if it had
not been for the law, o I would not have known sin. For I would not have
known what it is to covet if p the law had not said, “You shall not covet.”
8[†]But sin, q seizing an opportunity through the commandment, produced
in me all kinds of covetousness. r For apart from the law, sin lies dead. 9I
was once alive apart from the law, but when the commandment came, sin
came alive and I died. 10The very commandment s that promised life proved
to be death to me. 11For sin, t seizing an opportunity through the
commandment, u deceived me and through it killed me. 12So v the law is
holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
13[†]Did that which is good, then, bring death to me? By no means! It
was sin, producing death in me through what is good, in order that sin
might be shown to be sin, and through the commandment might become
sinful beyond measure. 14For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am of
the flesh, w sold under sin. 15For I do not understand my own actions. For
x I do not do what I want, but I do the very thing I hate. 16Now if I do what
I do not want, I agree with y the law, that it is good. 17[†]So now z it is no
longer I who do it, but sin that dwells within me. 18For I know that nothing
good dwells a in me, that is, in my flesh. For I have the desire to do what is
right, but not the ability to carry it out. 19 b For I do not do the good I want,
but the evil I do not want is what I keep on doing. 20Now if I do what I do
not want, c it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells within me.
21[†]So I find it to be a law that when I want to do right, evil lies close at
hand. 22For d I delight in the law of God, e in my inner being, 23but I see in
my members f another law waging war against the law of my mind and
making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members.
24[†]Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from g this body of
death? 25Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself
serve the law of God with my mind, but with my flesh I serve the law of
sin.
Life in the Spirit