ROMANS 14 [†]As for m the one who is weak in faith, welcome him, but not
to quarrel over opinions. 2[†] n One person believes he may eat anything,
while the weak person eats only vegetables. 3Let not the one who eats
despise the one who abstains, and o let not the one who abstains pass
judgment on the one who eats, for God has welcomed him. 4[†] p Who are
you to pass judgment on the servant of another? It is before his own
master [1] that he stands or falls. And he will be upheld, for the Lord is able
to make him stand.
5[†] q One person esteems one day as better than another, while another
esteems all days alike. r Each one should be fully convinced in his own
mind. 6The one who observes the day, observes it in honor of the Lord. The
one who eats, eats in honor of the Lord, since s he gives thanks to God,
while the one who abstains, abstains in honor of the Lord and gives thanks
to God. 7For t none of us lives to himself, and none of us dies to himself.
8For if we live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we die to the Lord. So
then, u whether we live or whether we die, we are the Lord’s. 9For to this
end Christ v died and lived again, that he might be Lord both w of the dead
and of the living.
10[†]Why do you pass judgment on your brother? Or you, why do you
despise your brother? For w we will all stand before x the judgment seat of
God; 11for it is written,
y “As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me,
and every tongue shall confess [2] to God.”
12So then z each of us will give an account of himself to God.
Do Not Cause Another to Stumble
13
a Therefore let us not pass judgment on one another any longer, but rather
decide b never to put a stumbling block or hindrance in the way of a brother.
14[†]I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus c that nothing is unclean in
itself, d but it is unclean for anyone who thinks it unclean. 15[†]For if your
brother is grieved by what you eat, e you are no longer walking in love. f By
what you eat, do not destroy the one for whom Christ died. 16 g So do not let
what you regard as good be spoken of as evil. 17
h For the kingdom of God
is not a matter of eating and drinking but i of righteousness and j peace and
joy in the Holy Spirit. 18Whoever thus serves Christ is k acceptable to God
and approved by men. 19So then let us l pursue what makes for peace and
for m mutual upbuilding.
20[†] n Do not, for the sake of food, destroy the work of God.
o Everything is indeed clean, but p it is wrong for anyone to make another
stumble by what he eats. 21 q It is good not to eat meat or drink wine or do
anything that causes your brother to stumble. [3] 22[†]The faith that you
have, keep between yourself and God. r Blessed is the one who has no
reason to pass judgment on himself for what he approves. 23[†]But whoever
has doubts is condemned if he eats, because the eating is not from faith. For
whatever does not proceed from faith is sin. [4]
The Example of Christ