RUTH 2 [†]Now Naomi had t a relative of her husband’s, a worthy man of
the clan of Elimelech, whose name was u Boaz. 2[†]And Ruth the Moabite
said to Naomi, “Let me go to the field and v glean among the ears of grain
after him w in whose sight I shall find favor.” And she said to her, “Go, my
daughter.” 3[†]So she set out and went and gleaned in the field after the
reapers, and she happened to come to the part of the field belonging to
Boaz, who was of the clan of Elimelech. 4And behold, Boaz came from
Bethlehem. And he said to the reapers, x “The LORD be with you!” And they
answered, “The LORD bless you.” 5Then Boaz said to his young man who
was in charge of the reapers, “Whose young woman is this?” 6And the
servant who was in charge of the reapers answered, “She is the young
Moabite woman, y who came back with Naomi from the country of Moab.
7She said, ‘Please let me glean and gather among the sheaves after the
reapers.’ So she came, and she has continued from early morning until now,
except for a short rest.” [1]
8[†]Then Boaz said to Ruth, “Now, listen, my daughter, do not go to
glean in another field or leave this one, but keep close to my young women.
9Let your eyes be on the field that they are reaping, and go after them. Have
I not charged the young men not to touch you? And when you are thirsty, go
to the vessels and drink what the young men have drawn.” 10[†]Then z she
fell on her face, bowing to the ground, and said to him, “Why have I found
favor in your eyes, that you should a take notice of me, since I am a
foreigner?” 11But Boaz answered her, b “All that you have done for your
mother-in-law since the death of your husband has been fully told to me,
and how you left your father and mother and your native land and came to a
people that you did not know before. 12[†] c The LORD repay you for what
you have done, and a full reward be given you by the LORD, the God of
Israel, under whose wings you have come to take refuge!” 13Then she said,
d “I have found favor in your eyes, my lord, for you have comforted me and
spoken kindly to your servant, though I am not one of your servants.”
14And at mealtime Boaz said to her, “Come here and eat some bread and
dip your morsel in the wine.” So she sat beside the reapers, and he passed to
her roasted grain. And she ate until e she was satisfied, and she had some
left over.
15When she rose to glean, Boaz instructed his young men, saying,
“Let her glean even among the sheaves, and do not reproach her.
16And also
pull out some from the bundles for her and leave it for her to glean, and do
not rebuke her.”
17[†]So she gleaned in the field until evening. Then she beat out what she
had gleaned, and it was about an ephah [2] of barley.
18And she took it up
and went into the city. Her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. She
also brought out and gave her what food she had left over f after being
satisfied. 19And her mother-in-law said to her, “Where did you glean today?
And where have you worked? Blessed be the man g who took notice of
you.” So she told her mother-in-law with whom she had worked and said,
“The man’s name with whom I worked today is Boaz.” 20[†]And Naomi
said to her daughter-in-law, h “May he be blessed by the LORD, whose
kindness has not forsaken i the living or the dead!” Naomi also said to her,
“The man is a close relative of ours, one of j our redeemers.” 21[†]And Ruth
the Moabite said, “Besides, he said to me, ‘You shall keep close by my
young men until they have finished all my harvest.’” 22And Naomi said to
Ruth, her daughter-in-law, “It is good, my daughter, that you go out with his
young women, lest in another field you be assaulted.” 23[†]So she kept
close to the young women of Boaz, gleaning until the end of the barley and
wheat harvests. And she lived with her mother-in-law.
Ruth and Boaz at the Threshing Floor