ZECHARIAH 11 [†] Open your doors, k O Lebanon,
that the fire may devour your cedars!
2 Wail, O cypress, for the cedar has fallen,
for the glorious trees are ruined!
Wail, k oaks of Bashan,
for the thick forest has been felled!
3 The sound of l the wail of l the shepherds,
for their glory is ruined!
The sound of the roar of m the lions,
n for the thicket of the Jordan is ruined!
4[†]Thus said the LORD my God: o “Become shepherd of the flock
doomed to slaughter.
5 p Those who buy them slaughter them and go
unpunished, and those who sell them say, ‘Blessed be the LORD, q I have
become rich,’ and their own shepherds have no pity on them. 6For r I will
no longer have pity on the inhabitants of this land, declares the LORD.
Behold, I will cause each of them to fall into the hand of his neighbor, and
each into the hand of his king, and they shall crush the land, and I will
deliver none from their hand.”
7[†] s So I became the shepherd of the flock doomed to be slaughtered by
the sheep traders. And I took two staffs, one I named u Favor, the other I
named v Union. s And I tended the sheep. 8[†]In one month w I destroyed
the three shepherds. But I became impatient with them, and they also
detested me. 9[†]So I said, “I will not be your shepherd. x What is to die, let
it die. What is to be destroyed, let it be destroyed. And let those who are left
devour the flesh of one another.” 10[†]And I took y my staff Favor, and I
broke it, annulling the covenant that I had made with all the peoples. 11So it
was annulled on that day, and the sheep traders, who were watching me,
knew that it was the word of the LORD.
12[†]Then I said to them, “If it
seems good to you, give me my wages; but if not, keep them.” And they
weighed out as my wages z thirty pieces of silver.
13Then the LORD said to
me, “Throw it to the potter”— a the lordly price at which I was priced by
them. So I took the z thirty pieces of silver and threw them into the house of
the LORD, to the potter.
14[†]Then I broke b my second staff Union,
annulling the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
15Then the LORD said to me, “Take once more the equipment of c a
foolish shepherd. 16For behold, I am raising up in the land a shepherd d who
does not care for those being destroyed, or seek the young or heal the
maimed or nourish the healthy, but e devours the flesh of the fat ones,
tearing off even their hoofs.
17[†] f “Woe to my worthless shepherd,
g who deserts the flock!
May the sword strike his arm
and h his right eye!
Let his arm be wholly withered,
his right eye utterly blinded!”
The LORD Will Give Salvation