ZECHARIAH 1 [†]In the eighth month, a in the second year of Darius, the
word of the LORD came to the prophet b Zechariah, the son of c Berechiah,
son of d Iddo, saying, 2 e “The LORD was very angry with your fathers.
3Therefore say to them, Thus declares the LORD of hosts: f Return to me,
says the LORD of hosts, and g I will return to you, says the LORD of hosts.
4 h Do not be like your fathers, i to whom the former prophets cried out,
‘Thus says the LORD of hosts, f Return from your evil ways and from your
evil deeds.’ But j they did not hear or pay attention to me, declares the
LORD.
5Your fathers, where are they? And k the prophets, do they live
forever? 6[†] l But my words and my statutes, which I commanded m my
servants the prophets, did they not n overtake your fathers? So they
repented and said, o ‘As the LORD of hosts purposed to deal with us for
p our ways and p deeds, so has he dealt with us.’”
A Vision of a Horseman
7[†]On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month of
Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to the
prophet b Zechariah, the son of c Berechiah, son of d Iddo, saying, 8“I saw
in the night, and behold, q a man riding on a red horse! He was standing
among the myrtle trees in the glen, and behind him were r red, sorrel, and
white horses. 9Then I said, ‘What are these, my lord?’ s The angel who
talked with me said to me, ‘I will show you what they are.’ 10[†]So q the
man who was standing among the myrtle trees answered, t ‘These are they
whom the LORD has sent to u patrol the earth.’ 11And they answered s the
angel of the LORD who was standing among the myrtle trees, and said,
u ‘We have patrolled the earth, and behold, all the earth v remains at rest.’
12[†]Then s the angel of the LORD said, w ‘O LORD of hosts, w how long will
you x have no mercy on Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, against which
you have been angry these y seventy years?’ 13[†]And the LORD answered
z gracious and comforting words to s the angel who talked with me. 14So
s the angel who talked with me said to me, ‘Cry out, Thus says the LORD of
hosts: a I am exceedingly jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion. 15 b And I am
exceedingly angry with the nations that are c at ease; d for while I was angry
but a little, e they furthered the disaster.
16Therefore, thus says the LORD, f I
have returned to Jerusalem with mercy; g my house shall be built in it,
declares the LORD of hosts, and h the measuring line shall be stretched out
over Jerusalem. 17[†]Cry out again, Thus says the LORD of hosts: i My cities
shall again overflow with prosperity, j and the LORD will again comfort
Zion and again k choose Jerusalem.’”
A Vision of Horns and Craftsmen
18[†] [1] And I lifted my eyes and saw, and behold, l four horns! 19And I said
to s the angel who talked with me, “What are these?” And he said to me,
l “These are the horns that have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.”
20Then the LORD showed me four craftsmen. 21And I said, “What are these
coming to do?” He said, l “These are the horns that scattered Judah, so that
no one raised his head. And these have come m to terrify them, to cast down
the horns of the nations n who lifted up their horns against the land of Judah
to scatter it.”
A Vision of a Man with a Measuring Line