ZECHARIAH 8 [†]And the word of the LORD of hosts came, saying, 2“Thus
says the LORD of hosts: s I am jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I am
jealous for her with great wrath. 3[†]Thus says the LORD: t I have returned
to Zion and u will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, v and Jerusalem shall be
called the faithful city, w and the mountain of the LORD of hosts, the holy
mountain. 4[†]Thus says the LORD of hosts: x Old men and old women shall
again sit in the streets of Jerusalem, each with staff in hand because of great
age. 5And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in its
streets. 6[†]Thus says the LORD of hosts: y If it is marvelous in the sight of
the remnant of this people in those days, z should it also be marvelous in my
sight, declares the LORD of hosts? 7[†]Thus says the LORD of hosts: Behold,
a I will save my people b from the east country and from the west country,
8[†]and I will bring them to dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. c And they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, d in faithfulness and in
righteousness.”
9Thus says the LORD of hosts: e “Let your hands be strong, you who in
these days have been hearing these words from the mouth of f the prophets
who were present on g the day that the foundation of the house of the LORD
of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built. 10For before those days
h there was no wage for man or any wage for beast, neither was there any
safety from the foe for him who went out or came in, for I set every man
against his neighbor.
11But now I will not deal with the remnant of this
people as in the former days, declares the LORD of hosts. 12[†] i For there
shall be a sowing of peace. The vine shall give its fruit, and the ground shall
give its produce, j and the heavens shall give their dew. k And I will cause
the remnant of this people to possess all these things. 13And as l you have
been a byword of cursing among the nations, O house of Judah and house
of Israel, m so will I save you, and n you shall be a blessing. o Fear not, but
e let your hands be strong.”
14For thus says the LORD of hosts: p “As I purposed to bring disaster to
you when your fathers provoked me to wrath, and I did not relent, says the
LORD of hosts, 15[†]so again have I purposed in these days to bring good to
Jerusalem and to the house of Judah; o fear not. 16These are the things that
you shall do: q Speak the truth to one another; r render in your gates
judgments s that are true and make for peace; 17 t do not devise evil in your
hearts against one another, and u love no false oath, for all these things I
hate, declares the LORD.”
18And the word of the LORD of hosts came to me, saying, 19[†]“Thus says
the LORD of hosts: The fast of the v fourth month and the fast of the w fifth
and the fast of the x seventh and the fast of the y tenth shall be to the house
of Judah z seasons of joy and gladness and cheerful feasts. Therefore love
a truth and peace.
20[†]“Thus says the LORD of hosts: Peoples shall yet come, even the
inhabitants of many cities. 21The inhabitants of one city shall go to another,
saying, b ‘Let us go at once c to entreat the favor of the LORD and to seek
the LORD of hosts; I myself am going.’ 22
b Many peoples and strong nations
shall come to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem and c to entreat the favor
of the LORD.
23[†]Thus says the LORD of hosts: In those days d ten men
e from the nations of every tongue shall take hold of the robe of a Jew,
saying, ‘Let us go with you, for f we have heard that God is with you.’”
Judgment on Israel’s Enemies