PHILIPPIANS 2:1
1875
I come and see you or am absent, I may
hear of your affairs, that you stand fast
in one spirit, p with one mind q striv ing
together for the faith of the gospel, 28 and
not in any way terrified by your adversar-
ies, which is to them a proof of perdition,
but 6 to you of salvation, and that from
God. 29 For to you r it has been granted
on behalf of Christ, s not only to believe
in Him, but also to t suffer for His sake,
30 u hav ing the same conflict v which you
saw in me and now hear is in me.
Unity Through Humility
2 Therefore if there is any 1 con so la tion
in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any a af fec tion
CHAPTER 2 1 a Col. 3:12 1 Or encouragement
by anyone. He vividly demonstrated that right actions are
not determined by environment but by right thinking. will
be magnified: Paul was committed to ensuring that Christ
would be made even more conspicuous in his own life than
ever. He was not relying on himself to exalt Christ but looked
to the Holy Spirit (see v. 19) to magnify Christ in him (see John
16:14; 2 Cor. 3:18). by life or by death: There was no difference
between life and death as far as Paul was concerned, as long
as that life or death magnified, glorified, and exalted Christ
before others.
1:21 For to me is similar to the common expression: “As far as
I’m concerned.” Christ . . . gain: Paul would experience gain in
his own death because he would be with Christ (v. 23). In fact,
Paul may have been expressing his confidence that since his
imprisonment had furthered the gospel, God would also use
his death to further His kingdom.
1:22 fruit from my labor: If Paul continued to live, he would
have the opportunity to preach the gospel to others and see
spiritual victory in the lives of the Philippians. what I shall
choose: Paul was in a dilemma because he clearly saw the ad-
vantages of both life and death for the Christian. Life meant
an opportunity to minister to people like the Philippians (see
v. 24), while death meant being with Christ his Savior.
1:23 Paul felt pressed in on every side, much like a besieged
city with no hope of relief from its affliction. He was torn
between the prospect of seeing the Lord and his passion for
ministering to the Philippians. A desire here means more than
a wish; it indicates an intense longing. to depart: In relation
to Paul’s profession as a tentmaker, the term depart means to
strike, or take down, the tent to be ready to travel elsewhere.
Paul saw death not as the end of life but as a time of moving
from one home to another.
1:25 your progress: Paul was not satisfied that the Philippian
Christians should simply be saved, but that they should ad-
vance to maturity in Christ. He felt a responsibility to con-
tinue to teach them.
1:27 let your conduct: The word used could refer to discharg-
ing the obligations of a citizen. Because Philippi held the
privileged status of a Roman colony, its citizens understood
the responsibilities associated with citizenship. Paul here
commanded them (the first command in the letter) to shift
their perspective from the earthly realm to the heavenly one.
They should live in this world as citizens of another world, the
heavenly kingdom. Their conduct should reveal their heavenly
citizenship. stand fast: They were not to stand alone in isola-
tion but together in oneness of spirit and mind, united for a
common goal. striving together: Teamwork is the key concept
expressed by this Greek word, which literally means “to en-
gage together in an athletic contest.” for the faith: God never
intended believers to be alone. His plan is that we should
gather together in a church in order to strengthen and en-
courage each other (see 2:2). Paul was urging them to strive to-
gether, not just for the sake of their individual faith, but also
on behalf of the truth of Christianity, their common faith.
1:28 The word translated terrified is a strong term that is used
of the terror of a panicked horse. The Philippians are not to
be terror-stricken in the face of their enemies. Their courage
would be proof of their salvation and of the ultimate failure
of their foes. proof of perdition: By striving together in love
and confidence, the Philippians would be living proof (a legal
term denoting proof obtained by an analysis of the facts) to
their opponents that the message of Jesus Christ is true. This
would confirm the lost state of their adversaries. Because
Paul contrasted salvation to perdition, his focus here un-
doubtedly was on eternal matters. Contrast this with Paul’s
focus on his own present salvation, or “deliverance,” in v. 19.
1:29 to suffer: Suffering is actually a gift from God, for in the
midst of suffering He comforts us (see 2 Cor. 1:5) and enables
us to rejoice (see 1 Pet. 4:12, 13). Suffering is a blessing be-
cause it brings eternal reward (see Matt. 5:1–12; 2 Cor. 4:17;
2 Tim. 2:12; Rev. 22:12). God sees suffering as a tool to accom-
plish His purposes both in His Son (see Heb. 2:10) and in His
children (see 1 Pet. 1:6, 7). Suffering, moreover, matures us as
Christians in the present (see James 1:2–4) and enables us to
be glorified with Christ in the future (see Rom. 8:17).
2:1 The Philippians’ biggest battle was not with their external
circumstances but with those internal attitudes that destroy
unity. Paul had demonstrated his own refusal to let external
circumstances control his attitudes (1:12–18). The therefore
ties together his conflict and their conflict. if . . . if . . . if . . .
if: The conditional clauses in this verse indicate certainties,
not “maybes.” Each if here expresses the idea of “since,” and
each following clause may be considered to be true. fellow-
ship: Scripture teaches that our fellowship is not only with
striving together (Gk. sunathleo ¯) (1:27; 4:3) Strong’s #4866: The image in Greek is drawn from athletic contests. Usually,
athletes competed one against another; in 1:27 Paul asks the church at Philippi to compete together as a team of athletes
to help advance the faith that comes through the preaching of the gospel. In the same epistle, he also mentions Euodia and
Syntyche as those who were contending for the gospel side by side with him (4:2, 3).
1876 PHILIPPIANS 2:2
and mercy, 2 b fulfill my joy c by being like-
minded, having the same love, be ing of
d one accord, of one mind. 3 e Let nothing
be done through selfish ambition or con-
ceit, but f in lowliness of mind let each
esteem others better than himself. 4 g Let
each of you look out not only for his
own interests, but also for the interests
of h others.
The Humbled and Exalted Christ
5 i Let this mind be in you which was
also in Christ Je sus, 6 who, j being in the
2 b John 3:29
c Rom. 12:16
d Phil. 4:2
3 e Gal. 5:26;
James 3:14 f Rom.
12:10; Eph. 5:21
4 g 1 Cor. 13:5
h Rom. 15:1, 2
5 i [Matt. 11:29];
Rom. 15:3
6 j 2 Cor. 4:4 2 Or
something to be
held onto to be
equal
7 k Ps. 22:6 l Is.
42:1 m [John 1:14];
form of God, did not consider it 2 rob bery
to be equal with God, 7 k but 3 made Him-
self of no reputation, taking the form l of
a bondser vant, andm coming in the like-
ness of men. 8 And being found in appear-
ance as a man, He humbled Himself and
n be came o obe di ent to the point of death,
even the death of the cross. 9 p There fore
God also q has highly exalted Him and
Rom. 8:3; Gal. 4:4; [Heb. 2:17] 3 emptied Himself of His
privileges 8 n Ps. 40:6–8; Matt. 26:39; John 10:18; [Rom.
5:19] o Heb. 5:8 9 p [Matt. 28:18]; Heb. 2:9 q Ps. 68:18; 110:1;
Is. 52:13; Acts 2:33 #
God the Holy Spirit as seen here, but also with God the Father
(see 1 John 1:3) and God the Son (see 1 Cor. 1:9; 1 John 1:3), as
well as with other Christians (see 1 John 1:7). affection: See
1:8. mercy: The Greek term means compassionate desires that
develop in response to a situation and that stimulate a per-
son to meet recognized needs in that situation.
2:2 In this verse the apostle sets forth a fourfold appeal, an
appeal that expresses one major idea—namely the unity of
the church. like-minded: This expresses Paul’s concern for
humility (see 4:2). Paul illustrates this attitude in 2:3, 4 and
then describes the greatest example of humility, Jesus Christ
Himself, in 2:5–8. same love: See 1:9. one accord: Paul here is
stressing a unity of spirit between Christians (see Ps. 133),
literally “a togetherness of soul.” one mind: The words Paul
uses to indicate one mind are virtually identical to the words
translated like-minded earlier in this verse. Paul was strongly
emphasizing the unity that should exist between believers
and how they must single-mindedly strive together to ad-
vance the gospel of Jesus Christ.
2:3 Here Paul attempts to correct any misunderstanding that
may arise from what he said earlier in the letter about some
preaching out of selfish motives (see 1:15, 16). He was con-
cerned that someone might think he was condoning selfish
ambition, so long as the gospel was being preached. conceit:
Paul uses a Greek term meaning “empty pride,” or “ground-
less self-esteem.” Pride should not be a Christian’s motiva-
tion; instead everything should be done in the power of the
Holy Spirit. lowliness of mind: The Greek word suggests a
deep sense of humility. Although the pagan writers used the
word negatively, in effect to mean abjectness or groveling,
Paul did not. What Paul was calling for was an honest evalu-
ation of one’s own nature. Such an evaluation should always
lead to a glorification of Christ. let each esteem: This verb
indicates a thorough analysis of the facts in order to reach
a correct conclusion about the matter. In other words, each
Philippian Christian was to properly assess himself or herself.
Such an assessment would lead to valuing others. others bet-
ter than himself: The honest self-examination that Paul was
calling for leads to true humility.
2:5 These verses (vv. 5–8) present one of the most significant
statements in all of Scripture on the nature of the Incar-
nation, the fact that God became man. Also, through this
wonderful description of Christ, Paul vividly illustrates the
principle of humility (vv. 3, 4). Let this mind be: All godly ac-
tion begins with the “renewing of the mind.” Right think-
ing produces right actions. Our actions are the fruit of our
deepest thoughts. in you: Thinking and being like Christ are
requirements not only for an individual but also for the cor-
porate body of believers. Together we need to think and act
like one being, like the Person of Jesus Christ.
2:6 robbery: Because Christ was God, He did not look on
sharing God’s nature as robbery, that is, as “a thing to be
seized,” as though He did not already possess it, or as “a
thing to be retained,” as though He might lose it. equal: As
used in this verse, this word speaks of equality of existence.
Christ was fully God, but He limited Himself in such a way
that He could also be completely human. In Christ, God be-
came man.
2:7 made Himself of no reputation: This phrase can be trans-
lated “He emptied Himself.” Christ did this by taking on the
form of a servant, a mere man. In doing this, He did not empty
Himself of any part of His essence as God. Instead He merely
gave up His privileges as God and took upon Himself existence
as a man. While remaining completely God, He became com-
pletely human. form: Jesus added to His divine essence (see
v. 6) a servant’s essence, that is, the essential characteristics
of a human being seeking to fulfill the will of another. bond-
servant: In this context, the term refers to the lowest status
on the social ladder (see Heb. 10:5), the exact opposite of the
term Lord, a title by which all will one day recognize the risen
and exalted Christ (see v. 11). It is truly amazing, therefore,
that the God who created the universe (see John 1:3; Col. 1:16)
and who rules over all creation (see Col. 1:17) would choose to
add to His person the nature of a servant. likeness: This word
does not mean that Christ only appeared to be a man. Rather,
the term emphasizes identity. In reality He was a man, pos-
sessing all the essential aspects of a human being, although
unlike all others He was sinless.
2:8 appearance: This is the third word Paul uses to show the
Philippians that Jesus Christ who is fully God from all eternity
is also fully man. In the previous verses, Paul describes Jesus
as possessing the nature of God and taking on the nature of
a servant. Jesus came to the earth with the identity of a man.
Here the word appearance points to the external character-
istics of Jesus: He had the bearing, actions, and manners of
a man. He humbled Himself: Jesus willingly took the role of
a servant; no one forced Him to do it. obedient: Although He
never sinned and did not deserve to die, He chose to die so
that the sins of the world could be charged to His account.
Subsequently He could credit His righteousness to the ac-
count of all who believe in Him (see 2 Cor. 5:21; Gal. 1:4). even
the death of the cross: Paul describes the depths of Christ’s
humiliation by reminding his readers that Christ died by the
cruelest form of capital punishment, crucifixion. The Romans
reserved the agonizing death of crucifixion for slaves and for-
eigners, and the Jews viewed death on a cross as a curse from
God (see Deut. 21:23; Gal. 3:13).
2:9 Note the contrast between Jesus’ placing Himself in a de-
form of God (Gk. morphe ¯ theou) (2:6) Strong’s #3444; 2316: The Greek word for form was generally used to express the
way in which a thing exists and appears according to what it is in itself. Thus the expression form of God may be correctly
understood as the essential nature and character of God. To say, therefore, that Christ existed in the form of God is to say
that apart from His human nature Christ possesses all the characteristics and qualities belonging to God because He is, in
fact, God.
r given Him the name which is above
every name, 10 s that at the name of Je sus
every knee should bow, of those in heav-
en, and of those on earth, and of those
under the earth, 11 and t that every tongue
should confess that Je sus Christ is Lord,
to the glory of God the Father.
Light Bearers
12 There fore, my beloved, u as you have
always obeyed, not as in my presence
only, but now much more in my absence,
v work out your own salvation with w fear
and trembling; 13 forx it is God who works
in you both to will and to do y for His
good pleasure.
14 Do all things z with out 4 com plain ing
anda dis put ing,5 15 that you may become
blameless and 6 harmless, children of God
without fault in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation, among whom
you shine as b lights in the world, 16 hold-
ing fast the word of life, so that c I may
9 r Is. 9:6; Luke
1:32; Eph. 1:21
10 s Is. 45:23; Rom.
14:11; Rev. 5:13
11 t John 13:13;
[Rom. 10:9; 14:9]
12 u Phil. 1:5, 6;
4:15 v John 6:27,
29; 2 Pet. 1:10
w Eph. 6:5
13 x Rom. 12:3;
1 Cor. 12:6; 15:10;
2 Cor. 3:5; Heb.
13:20, 21 y Eph. 1:5
14 z 1 Cor. 10:10;
1 Pet. 4:9 a Rom.
14:1 4 grumbling
5 arguing
15 b Matt. 5:15, 16
6 innocent
16 c 2 Cor. 1:14
d Gal. 2:2 e Is. 49:4;
Gal. 4:11; 1 Thess.
3:5
17 f 2 Cor. 12:15;
2 Tim. 4:6 g Num.
28:6, 7; Rom. 15:16
h 2 Cor. 7:4
19 i Rom. 16:21
PHILIPPIANS 2:24
1877
rejoice in the day of Christ that d I have
not run in vain or labored in e vain.
17 Yes, and if f I am being poured out as
a drink offering on the sacrifice g and ser-
vice of your faith, h I am glad and rejoice
with you all. 18 For the same reason you
also be glad and rejoice with me.
Timothy Commended
19 But I trust in the Lord Je sus to send
i Tim o thy to you shortly, that I also may
be encouraged when I know your 7 state.
20 For I have no one j like-minded, who
will sincerely care for your state. 21 For
all seek their own, not the things which
are of Christ Je sus. 22 But you know his
proven character, k that as a son with his
father he served with me in the gospel.
23 There fore I hope to send him at once, as
soon as I see how it goes with me. 24 But
7 condition 20 j 1 Cor. 16:10; 2 Tim. 3:10 22 k 1 Cor. 4:17
based status (see v. 8) with God the Father’s elevation of Jesus
to a highly exalted status.
2:10 every knee: Although all will one day worship Christ, only
those who put their faith in Him in this life will have an ever-
lasting relationship with Him after death (see Rev. 20:13–15).
those under the earth: Paul refers here to those who will
already have died at the time of Christ’s return, in contrast
to the angels in heaven and those who will still be living on
earth.
2:11 confess: The term Paul uses is a strong, intensive verb,
which means “agree with” or “say the same thing.” Essential-
ly Paul is saying that everyone will unanimously affirm what
God the Father has already stated (Is. 45:23): that Jesus Christ
is Lord.
2:12 Therefore: Paul desires the Philippians to respond posi-
tively to his admonition to have the mind of Christ (vv. 5–8).
The command is to the entire group since the word you is
plural. The subject is their mutual, corporate salvation (see
1:19, 28; Luke 22:24–30). work out: The Greek term speaks of
the present deliverance of the Philippians. The word trans-
lated work out is used by the first-century author Strabo to
speak of digging silver out of silver mines. Thus salvation can
be compared to a huge gift that needs to be unwrapped for
one’s thorough enjoyment. Note that Paul is encouraging the
Philippians to develop and work out their salvation, but not
to work for their salvation.
2:14 The Philippians have been secretly discontented and
have been complaining (2:1–4). But the word used suggests
that loud dissension had not yet broken out.
2:15 This verse focuses on the testimony of the church. The
purpose of the command in v. 14 is that the Philippians might
be blameless light bearers in their world. They should de-
serve no censure because they are free from fault or defect
in relation to the outside world (see 3:6). If the Philippian be-
lievers were going to have a testimony in their community,
they had to be blameless in their actions and attitudes, both
inside and outside the church (see 1 Tim. 3:2). without fault:
This term is a technical word used to denote anything that
is fit to be offered as a sacrifice to God, without blot or blem-
ish, untainted by sin. crooked and perverse generation: Paul
describes the world as being the opposite of Christian. On
the one hand the world is turned away from the truth, while
on the other hand it exerts a corrupting influence that is op-
posed to the truth. shine as lights: Paul depicts believers as
stars whose light penetrates the spiritual darkness of a per-
verted world. Jesus said, “I am the light of the world.” He also
said, “You are the light of the world” (Matt. 5:14). We are the
light of the world as long as we reflect Christ.
2:16 The Greek verb translated holding fast contains two
thoughts: holding fast and holding forth. The former con-
cept suggests a steadfastness in which our lights (see v. 15)
blaze continually for God. The latter concept implies project-
ing our lights into the darkness of this world. Run suggests
energetic activity, while labored indicates the toil of Paul’s
ministry.
2:17 being poured out: Both Jews and Greeks sometimes
poured wine out on an altar in connection with religious sac-
rifices (see Num. 15:1–10). Some have interpreted this figure
of speech as depicting Paul’s own martyrdom for the cause
of Christ. However the content of the letter reveals by con-
trast that Paul assumes he will live (see 1:25) and expects to
be released from prison shortly (see v. 24). Thus Paul probably
was saying that he was presently being poured out as a living
offering on behalf of the faith of the Philippians. sacrifice:
This means primarily the act of offering something to God.
service: Paul chooses a Greek term that depicts a person who
fulfills the duties of a public office at his or her own expense.
In the Christian context, this word speaks of worship humbly
offered to God.
2:19 Paul balanced the previous somber passage (vv. 12–18)
with the optimistic hope of sending his coworker Timothy,
whose name means “One Who Honors God” and was from a
believing family. Both his mother Eunice and his grandmother
Lois had become Christians (see 2 Tim. 1:5). He had accompa-
nied Paul on the second missionary journey, during which
time they had established the church at Philippi. Timothy
apparently was well-loved by the Philippians, and he in turn
exhibited a great concern for them (see vv. 20–22).
2:20 like-minded: Timothy and Paul had the same quality of
concern for the Philippians (see Paul’s command in v. 2 for
the Philippians to be like-minded).
2:22 Timothy had shown his faithful character to the Philip-
pians, who knew of his ten years of ministry with the apos-
tle Paul. as a son: In NT times, a son who served his father
did so to learn the family trade. Serving in this way meant
learning all about the business and being willing to obey
the teacher in order to become as skillful as possible in the
work.
1878 PHILIPPIANS 2:25
I trust in the Lord that I myself shall also
come shortly.
Epaphroditus Praised
25 Yet I considered it necessary to send
to you l E paph ro ditus, my brother, fellow
worker, and m fellow soldier, n but your
messenger and o the one who ministered
to my need; 26 p since he was longing for
you all, and was distressed because you
had heard that he was sick. 27 For indeed
he was sick almost unto death; but God
had mercy on him, and not only on him
but on me also, lest I should have sor-
row upon sorrow. 28 There fore I sent him
the more eagerly, that when you see him
again you may rejoice, and I may be less
sorrowful. 29 Re ceive him therefore in the
Lord with all gladness, and hold such
men in esteem; 30 because for the work
of Christ he came close to death, 8 not re-
garding his life, q to supply what was lack-
ing in your service toward me.
25 l Phil. 4:18
25 m Philem.
2 n John 13:16;
2 Cor. 8:23 o 2 Cor.
11:9
26 p Phil. 1:8
30 q 1 Cor. 16:17;
Phil. 4:10 8 risking
CHAPTER 3
1 a 1 Thess. 5:16
2 b Ps. 22:16, 20;
Gal. 5:15; Rev.
22:15 c Ps. 119:115
d Rom. 2:28
3 e Deut. 30:6;
Rom. 2:28, 29; 9:6;
[Gal. 6:15] f John
4:24; Rom. 7:6
1 NU, M in the
Spirit of God
4 g 2 Cor. 5:16;
11:18 h 2 Cor.
11:22, 23
5 i Rom. 11:1
j 2 Cor. 11:22
k Acts 23:6
All for Christ
3 Finally, my brethren, a re joice in
the Lord. For me to write the same
things to you is not tedious, but for you
it is safe.
2 b Be ware of dogs, beware of c evil work-
ers, d be ware of the mutilation! 3 For we
are e the circumcision, f who worship
1 God in the Spirit, rejoice in Christ Je sus,
and have no confidence in the flesh,
4 though g I also might have confidence in
the flesh. If anyone else thinks he may
have confidence in the flesh, I h more so:
5 cir cum cised the eighth day, of the stock
of Is rael, i of the tribe of Ben ja min, j a He-
brew of the He brews; concerning the law,
k a Phari see; 6 con cern ing zeal, l per se cut-
ing the church; concerning the righteous-
ness which is in the law, blameless.
7 But m what things were gain to me,
these I have counted loss for Christ. 8 Yet
6 l Acts 8:3; 22:4, 5;26:9–11 7 m Matt. 13:44
2:25 Epaphroditus was a Philippian Christian sent by the
church in Philippi to take a gift to Paul (see 4:18) and to as-
sist Paul in his ministry. He is described with a series of com-
plimentary terms: a “brother,” a “fellow worker,” a “fellow
soldier,” a “messenger” to the Philippians, and a “minister”
to Paul. He is mentioned in the Bible only in this letter. fel-
low worker: Paul considers Epaphroditus to be an equal in
the work of the gospel. The title of fellow soldier was given
only to those who had fought honorably alongside another.
Paul thus offered high praise to Epaphroditus for his faithful
service in the cause of Christ. your messenger: Here Paul uses
the Greek term usually translated apostle in its nontechni-
cal sense. Both Paul and Epaphroditus are messengers, but
Paul’s authority is greater than Epaphroditus’s. Paul had a
direct commission from Jesus Christ, while Epaphroditus was
sent by the Philippians.
2:26 longing: Paul declares that Epaphroditus demonstrates
the same concern for the Philippians as he himself does (see
1:8). Thus they are one in their work for the Lord (see v. 25),
and they are one in their love for the Lord’s people.
2:27 sick almost unto death: Paul was making certain that
the Philippians understood the effort that Epaphroditus had
made for the cause of Jesus Christ. Epaphroditus’s condition
had been far worse than perhaps they had imagined. Paul
viewed Epaphroditus’s healing as God’s direct intervention.
Though Paul exercised apostolic powers (see 2 Cor. 12:12),
those powers were useless outside of the will and timing of
God.
2:30 not regarding his life: Paul informs the Philippians of the
commitment that Epaphroditus had for the work that they
had given him to do. to supply what was lacking: Paul ac-
knowledges the work that the Philippians had already done
for him. Epaphroditus was able to do what the Philippians
could not do: be physically present to minister to him.
3:1 safe: Paul is concerned that the Philippians do not fall into
the trap set forth by those within the church who support
heresy.
3:2 In NT times, dogs were hated scavengers. The term came
to be used for all who had morally impure minds. evil work-
ers: Since the term workers was occasionally used to iden-
tify those who propagated a religion, the words evil workers
probably refers to teachers who are spreading destructive
doctrines. mutilation: Paul here points sarcastically and
specifically to those who desire to reinstate Jewish religious
practices as necessary for salvation. He chooses a term that
literally means “to cut.” By doing so, he suggests that these
people do not even understand the truth about the OT prac-
tice of circumcision but understand it merely as a cutting of
the flesh.
3:3 Paul defines true circumcision as a matter of the heart
and not of the flesh. He reveals three aspects of true circum-
cision: (1) worshiping God in the Spirit; (2) rejoicing in Christ;
and (3) placing no confidence in any human honor or accom-
plishment as a means to reach God. The OT also taught that
circumcision was more than a ritual of the flesh (see Lev.
26:41; Deut. 10:16, 30:6; Jer. 4:4; Ezek. 44:7).
3:4–9 Paul speaks as though he had confidence in the flesh
to show that the reason he did not rely on Jewish credentials
was not that he did not possess them, but that they could not
achieve the righteousness only God could provide.
3:5 eighth day: Paul’s parents obeyed God’s law and had Paul
circumcised on the appropriate day after his birth (see Lev.
12:2, 3). The people of Israel are called the people of God.
That Paul states he is of the stock of Israel implies that he
is able to trace his origins to the true line of Israel, to Jacob
and not Esau. tribe of Benjamin: The tribe of Benjamin was
highly regarded by Israelites because that line had produced
the first king of Israel and had remained loyal to David. Fur-
thermore, that tribe had joined Judah after the Exile to form
the foundation for the restored nation (see 1 Sam. 9:15–21;
1 Kin. 12:21–24). Hebrew of the Hebrews: This description of
Paul may indicate that (1) both his parents were Jews, (2) he
was a model Jew, or (3) he was educated completely as a Jew.
Pharisee: Pharisees were highly educated Jewish leaders who
spearheaded the opposition against Jesus while He was on
earth, and later against the Christian church. They rigorous-
ly followed and defended the letter of the Jewish law. Paul
himself came from a line of Pharisees (see Acts 23:6) and had
studied under Gamaliel, a highly respected Pharisee of that
day (see Acts 22:3).
3:6 persecuting the church: Prior to becoming a Christian,
Paul vigorously attacked those who believed in Christ, even
to the point of having them put to death (see Acts 7:58—8:3;
9:1, 2).
3:7 gain: See 1:21. loss: This word indicates that which is dam-
aged or of no further use (see v. 8; Acts 27:10, 21). Those things
that Paul thought to be important became unimportant after
confronting the resurrected Messiah.
The Believers at Philippi
There must have been very few Jews in
Philippi because the city did not have a syn-
agogue, and in fi rst-century Judaism it took only
ten Jewish men to justify building a synagogue
for worship. The Jews who did live in Philippi
went outside the city gate to the banks of the
Gangites River for worship and prayer. Philippi
was a culturally diverse Roman city on the
main highway (the Egnatian Way) from the
eastern provinces to Rome, and the church at
Philippi had a diverse group of believers. The
NT specifi cally mentions an Asian, a Greek, and
a Roman. One was a businesswoman who sold
purple cloth to the rich; one was a slave girl who
had been possessed with a spirit of divination;
the third was a jailer. These people represented
three different races, three different social
ranks, and probably three different religious
loyalties before encountering Christ.
indeed I also count all things loss n for
the excellence of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and count them as
rubbish, that I may gain Christ 9 and be
found in Him, not having o my own righ-
teousness, which is from the law, but
p that which is through faith in Christ, the
righteousness which is from God by faith;
10 that I may know Him and the q power of
8 n Is. 53:11; Jer.
9:23; John 17:3;
1 Cor. 2:2; [Eph.
4:13]
9 o Rom. 10:3
p Rom. 1:17
10 q Eph. 1:19, 20
r [Rom. 6:3–5];
2 Cor. 1:5; 1 Pet.
4:13
11 s Acts 26:6–8;
[1 Cor. 15:23;
Rev. 20:5] 2 Lit.
arrive at
12 t 1 Cor. 9:24;
[1 Tim. 6:12,
19]u Heb. 12:23
3 obtained it
13 v Luke 9:62
w Heb. 6:1 4 laid
hold of it
14 x 2 Tim. 4:7
y Heb. 3:1
15 z Matt. 5:48;
1 Cor. 2:6 a Gal.
5:10 b Hos. 6:3;
James 1:5
16 c Gal. 6:16
d Rom. 12:16; 15:5
5 arrived 6 NU
omits rule and
the rest of v. 16.
17 e [1 Cor. 4:16;
11:1]; Phil. 4:9
f Titus 2:7, 8;
1 Pet. 5:3
PHILIPPIANS 3:18
1879
His resurrection, and r the fellowship of
His sufferings, being conformed to His
death, 11 if, by any means, I may s at tain2
to the resurrection from the dead.
Pressing Toward the Goal
12 Not that I have already t at tained,3
or am already u perfected; but I press on,
that I may lay hold of that for which
Christ Je sus has also laid hold of me.
13 Breth ren, I do not count myself to have
4 ap pre hended; but one thing I do,v for get-
ting those things which are behind and
w reach ing forward to those things which
are ahead, 14 x I press toward the goal for
the prize of y the upward call of God in
Christ Je sus.
15 There fore let us, as many as are z ma-
ture, a have this mind; and if in anything
you think otherwise, b God will reveal
even this to you. 16 Nev er the less, to the
degree that we have already 5 at tained, c let
us walk d by the same 6 rule, let us be of
the same mind.
Our Citizenship in Heaven
17 Breth ren, e join in following my ex-
ample, and note those who so walk, as
f you have us for a pattern. 18 For many
walk, of whom I have told you often,
3:8 excellence: The value of knowing Christ surpasses all else
(see 2:3; 4:7). rubbish: This word means anything that is de-
testable or worthless. All the things of this world are rubbish
compared to Christ. Even “our righteousnesses are like filthy
rags” (see Is. 64:6). I may gain: The former gain (see v. 7) is here
substituted for the latter gain: Christ Jesus (see 1:21).
3:9 from the law: In vv. 6 and 7, Paul reveals the uselessness
of righteousness that is in the law. Here he divulges that his
own righteousness that had been in that law was also in vain.
through faith in Christ: Paul recognizes that true righteous-
ness is a matter of faith, not of works. It is God’s righteous-
ness that comes through Christ, not our own righteousness.
3:10 Paul indicates that he rejected his own righteousness
in order to secure not merely an intellectual knowledge of
Christ but also a relational knowledge, in fact, an intimate
knowledge of Him. power of His resurrection: Paul does not
say the power “in” His resurrection, which would specify the
power of the one-time event of His resurrection. Rather Paul
seeks the ongoing power that is the day-to-day experience
of being in Christ. Paul may also be alluding to his desire to
be clothed with his own resurrection body. fellowship of His
sufferings: Paul sees the value of participating in the perse-
cutions or struggles that naturally accompany one who is in
partnership (that is, fellowship, see 1:5) with Christ and His
sufferings (see James 1:2–4; 1 Pet. 2:21–24). being conformed
to His death: Paul desires to imitate Christ—even in His
death. In other words, Paul wants to be completely obedient
to God the Father, just as Jesus was obedient to His Father’s
will (Luke 22:42).
3:11 Attain to means “to arrive at” as well as to “become
a partaker of.” Paul was not doubting his participation in
the resurrection but was instead viewing it in expectation
(1 Cor. 15:1–34). Paul desired to be with those Christians who,
through their victory in Christ, would receive special reward
in the resurrection (see Heb. 11:35).
3:12 not . . . attained: Paul chooses a different Greek word
from that translated in v. 11 as attain. Here he indicates he
has not yet “gained possession of” or “laid hold of” all that
he seeks to be. perfected: The Greek term means mature or
complete, finished. It does not specifically mean a moral or
sinless perfection. Paul is not speaking of moral perfection
or righteousness but of reaching the state of completion as
a Christian. press on: Paul “pursues with all deliberate speed”
the goal that is before him. The verb form indicates that he is
doing this continually. lay hold of: This phrase adds the idea
of overtaking by surprise to the sense of seizing some object.
Paul urgently wants to “grab hold of” God as God had laid
hold of him (Acts 9:1–22). Christ had dramatically and sud-
denly seized Paul on the road to Damascus, and his life was
never the same since.
3:13 Paul could not obliterate the past from his memory, but he
refused to let his past obstruct his progress toward his goal.
He wanted to forget his self-righteous past (see vv. 4–7). By
using the present tense for forgetting Paul was indicating that
it is an ongoing process. He might even be implying that he
wanted to forget everything so that he would not rest on his
past successes in Christ, but continue to labor for the Lord.
3:14 goal: This word specifically refers to the marker at the
end of a race on which runners intently fix their eyes. The
prize is the reward for victory. Paul evidently takes to heart
what he teaches in 1 Cor. 9:24. upward call: In the NT this
speaks of the divine call to complete salvation. It may refer
to the judgment seat of Christ, the place of reward. Paul does
not say that he is pressing on for the call of God but rather for
the prize of that call. He is not working for his salvation but
rather for a reward.
3:16 let us walk: Paul commands the Philippians to conduct
themselves as soldiers who “march in line” together, orga-
nized, each in his proper position.
3:17 The word pattern indicates an exact representation of
the original. The example of Paul’s life is so evident that one
can readily see it and use it as a pattern for living.
3:18 The term weeping reveals Paul’s compassion and con-
cern for those who most tragically are the enemies of the
1880 PHILIPPIANS 3:19
and now tell you even weeping, that they
are g the enemies of the cross of Christ:
19 h whose end is destruction, i whose god
is their belly, and j whose glory is in their
shame—k who set their mind on earthly
things. 20 For l our citizenship is in heaven,
m from which we also n eagerly wait for the
Sav ior, the Lord Je sus Christ, 21 o who will
transform our lowly body that it may be
p conformed to His glorious body, q ac cord-
ing to the working by which He is able
even to r subdue all things to Himself.
4 Therefore, my beloved and a longed-
for brethren, b my joy and crown, so
c stand fast in the Lord, beloved.
Be United, Joyful, and in Prayer
2 I implore Eu odia and I implore Synty-
che d to be of the same mind in the Lord.
3 1 And I urge you also, true companion,
help these women who e labored with me
in the gospel, with Clement also, and the
rest of my fellow workers, whose names
are in f the Book of Life.
18 g Gal. 1:7
19 h 2 Cor. 11:15
i 1 Tim. 6:5 j Hos.
4:7 k Rom. 8:5;
Col. 3:2
20 l Eph. 2:6, 19;
Phil. 1:27; [Col.
3:1; Heb. 12:22]
m Acts 1:11
n 1 Cor. 1:7
21 o [1 Cor.
15:43–53] p 1 John
3:2 q Eph. 1:19
r [1 Cor. 15:28]
CHAPTER 4
1 a Phil. 1:8
b 2 Cor. 1:14
c 1 Cor. 16:13; Phil.
1:27
2 d Phil. 2:2; 3:16
3 e Rom. 16:3 f Ex.
32:32; Luke 10:20
1 NU, M Yes
4 g Rom. 12:12
5 h 1 Cor. 16:22;
Heb. 10:25, 37;
[James 5:7–9];
Rev. 22:7, 20
2 graciousness or
4 g Re joice in the Lord always. Again I
will say, rejoice!
5 Let your 2 gen tle ness be known to all
men. h The Lord is at hand.
6 i Be anxious for nothing, but in every-
thing by prayer and supplication, with
j thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known to God; 7 and k the peace of God,
which surpasses all understanding, will
guard your hearts and minds through
Christ Je sus.
Meditate on These Things
8 Finally, brethren, whatever things are
l true, whatever things are m noble, what-
ever things are n just,o whatever things
are pure, whatever things are p lovely,
whatever things are of good report, if
there is any virtue and if there is anything
praisewor thy—med i tate on these things.
forbearance 6 i Ps. 55:22; Matt. 6:25; 1 Pet. 5:7 j [1 Thess.
5:17, 18] 7 k [Is. 26:3; John 14:27]; Phil. 4:9; Col. 3:15 8 l Eph.
4:25 m 2 Cor. 8:21 n Deut. 16:20 o 1 Thess. 5:22; James 3:17
p 1 Cor. 13:4–7
cross. In v. 2, he offers a stern warning against them, but here
he weeps for them.
3:19 In this verse destruction indicates the opposite of eter-
nal salvation (see 1:19, 28). belly: The physical appetites of
the “many” (v. 18) control and consume them. glory is in their
shame: The things in which they take pride actually are the
things that will bring “disgrace” or “humiliation” to them,
things of which they should have been ashamed.
3:20 Christians need to remember that though we are in this
world we are not of this world; our ultimate citizenship is in
heaven. eagerly wait: Here Paul presents a direct contrast
to the earthly focus of the enemies of the Cross in v. 19. The
eager desire of Christians is not earthly things, but a heavenly
Person, the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ (see Rom. 8:19–25).
3:21 Paul guarantees that Christ will transform, or “change in
appearance,” the believer. lowly body: What God will trans-
form is the physical body. conformed to His glorious body: In
v. 10, Christians are conformed to Christ’s death; here they are
conformed to His life. Our body now is weak and susceptible
to sin, disease, and death. But God will change our bodies to
resemble Christ’s glorious resurrection body.
4:2 Euodia . . . Syntyche: These were Christian women at
Philippi who had fallen into some disagreement that was af-
fecting the whole church. What is written in vv. 2, 3 is all that
is known about the two women or about their dispute. Paul
does not take sides in the argument, but instead encourages
them to be reconciled.
4:3 I urge: This word implies a certain level of familiarity; it in-
troduces a request, not a demand. true companion: The iden-
tity of this person is unknown. It may be a specific person
named Syzygos (the Greek word for companion), someone
else particularly close to Paul, or any of the faithful Christians
in the church who could help resolve the dispute. help: This
verb means literally “to assist by holding together” and sug-
gests that the women’s dispute is not minor but potentially
divisive. The Book of Life refers to a book in heaven where
the names of believers are recorded (Dan. 12:1; Rev. 21:27).
4:4 In the midst of difficulties, in the midst of all situations,
Christians are to rejoice. The joy of Christians is not based
on agreeable circumstances, instead it is based on their rela-
tionship to God. Christians will face trouble in this world, but
they should rejoice in the trials they face because they know
God is using those situations to improve their character (see
James 1:2–4).
4:5 gentleness: This noun identifies a person who manifests a
calmness and fairness of spirit. A person who is gentle is will-
ing to sacrifice his or her own personal rights to show consid-
eration to others. at hand: The Lord’s return could occur at
any moment. Paul uses that fact to motivate the Philippians
to honor God with their lives.
4:6 Paul exhorts the Philippians to pray about their circum-
stances instead of worrying over them. be anxious for noth-
ing: Although the same word in 2:20 describes Timothy’s con-
cern for the Philippians, here Paul uses the word to refer to
worry. He prohibits the Philippians from worrying about their
own problems. Instead they are to commit their problems to
God in prayer, trusting that He will provide deliverance.
4:7 will guard: Paul’s choice of a military term implies that the
mind is in a battle zone and needs to be “protected by a mili-
tary guard.” Since the purpose of such a guard in a wartime
situation is either to prevent a hostile invasion or to keep
the inhabitants of a besieged city from escaping, the peace
of God operates in the same way: to protect the mind from
external corrupting influences and to keep the mind focused
on God’s truth.
4:8 noble: This term describes that which is of honorable char-
acter. pure: This word is closely associated with the Greek
word for holy and thus means “sacred” or “immaculate.” med-
itate on: Paul commands the Philippians “to deliberate,” “to
evaluate,” “to compute over and over” what is good and pure.
In this way, Christians can renew their minds so that they will
not conform to the evil habits of this world (Rom. 12:2).
virtue (Gk. arete ¯) (4:8; 1 Pet. 2:9; 2 Pet. 1:3) Strong’s #703: A rare word in the NT but generously used in Greek writings, this
word denotes moral excellence. Peter in his fi rst letter uses the word to describe the excellent nature or “excellencies” of
God (see 1 Pet. 2:9 where the word is translated praises). Such excellence is said to have been possessed by various people,
but it is a quality that comes from God. Only those who are given divine power can be morally excellent on this earth
(2 Pet. 1:3).
9 The things which you learned and re-
ceived and heard and saw in me, these
do, and q the God of peace will be with
you.
Philippian Generosity
10 But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly
that now at last r your 3 care for me has
flourished again; though you surely did
care, but you lacked opportunity. 11 Not
that I speak in regard to need, for I have
learned in whatever state I am, s to be
content: 12 t I know how to 4 be abased,
and I know how to 5 abound. Every-
where and in all things I have learned
both to be full and to be hungry, both to
abound and to suffer need. 13 I can do all
thingsu through 6 Christ who strength-
ens me.
14 Nev er the less you have done well that
v you shared in my distress. 15 Now you
Phi lippi ans know also that in the begin-
ning of the gospel, when I departed from
9 q Rom. 15:33;
Heb. 13:20
10 r 2 Cor. 11:9;
Phil. 2:30 3 you
have revived
your care
11 s 2 Cor. 9:8;
1 Tim. 6:6, 8; Heb.
13:5
12 t 1 Cor. 4:11
4 live humbly
5 live in
prosperity
13 u John 15:5
6 NU Him who
14 v Phil. 1:7
15 w 2 Cor. 11:8, 9
17 x Titus 3:14
18 y Phil. 2:25
z Heb. 13:16
a Rom. 12:1; 2 Cor.
9:12 7 Or have
received all
19 b Ps. 23:1;
2 Cor. 9:8
20 c Rom. 16:27
21 d Gal. 1:2
23 8 NU your spirit
PHILIPPIANS 4:23
1881
Mac e doni a, w no church shared with me
concerning giving and receiving but you
only. 16 For even in Thes sa lo nica you sent
aid once and again for my necessities.
17 Not that I seek the gift, but I seek x the
fruit that abounds to your account. 18 In-
deed I 7 have all and abound. I am full,
having received from y E paph ro ditus the
things sent from you, z a sweet-smelling
aroma, a an accepta ble sacrifice, well
pleasing to God. 19 And my God b shall
supply all your need according to His
riches in glory by Christ Je sus. 20 c Now to
our God and Father be glory forever and
ever. Amen.
Greeting and Blessing
21 Greet every saint in Christ Je sus. The
brethren d who are with me greet you.
22 All the saints greet you, but espe cially
those who are of Cae sar’s household.
23 The grace of our Lord Je sus Christ be
with 8 you all. Amen.
The Christian Quest
SEEK
• Christ above all (1:21; 3:7, 8) and FIND righteousness in Christ and the power of His resurrection (3:9–11).
• Christlike humility (2:5–7) and FIND God’s will in the believer (2:12, 13).
• A divinely appointed goal (3:14) and FIND the prize of eternal salvation (3:14).
• All things that are true, noble, just, pure, lovely, virtuous, and praiseworthy (4:8) and FIND the
presence of the God of peace (4:9).
4:9 learned: This verb conveys not only the concept of “in-
creasing in intellectual knowledge” but also the idea of
“learning by habitual practice.” In some areas of their Chris-
tian development the Philippians had been excellent disci-
ples of Paul, practicing what he had taught.
4:10–20 What Paul discusses in this section may be the reason
why he wrote this letter. The Philippians had given him a gift
and he desired to thank them for it. In this section, Paul indi-
cates that the Philippians would be rewarded for their gift
and that God would meet all their needs.
4:10 flourished again: Paul uses an agricultural word found
only here in the NT to picture a plant that “shoots up” or
“sprouts again,” describing a condition of prosperity or
abundance. lacked opportunity: Paul politely lets the Phi-
lippians know that he is aware of their continual concern
for him.
4:11 content: The word literally means “self-sufficient.” In
Stoic philosophy this Greek word described a person who
dispassionately accepted whatever circumstances brought.
For the Greeks, this contentment came from personal suffi-
ciency. But for Paul true sufficiency is found in the strength
of Christ (v. 13).
4:15 giving and receiving: Paul considers the relationship
between himself and the Philippians to be a two-way street,
with both parties actively involved in the sharing of both ma-
terial and spiritual gifts.
4:17 Paul has in mind in this verse the material gift that the
Philippians sent to him. account: Paul uses business termi-
nology. The Philippians’ gift was producing spiritual profit
just as money deposited in a bank account accrues interest.
But Paul was not as concerned with their gift as with the de-
velopment in the Philippians of the spiritual ability to give.
4:18 an acceptable sacrifice: By giving to Paul, the Philippians
had offered themselves as a gift to God (see Rom. 12:1, 2).
4:19 In v. 18 Paul says that he is full because they gave. In this
verse he writes that God will supply all their needs. The Phi-
lippians, in turn, will be full because of the gifts God will give
them. according to His riches: Out of His abundant wealth,
God will more than amply take care of the Philippians.
4:20 The Jewish practice of closing prayers with the word
amen carried over to the Christian church as well. When
found at the end of a sentence as it is here, the word can be
translated “so be it,” or “may it be fulfilled.” At the beginning
of a sentence, it means “surely,” “truly,” or “most assuredly.”
4:22 those . . . of Caesar’s household: These believers may
have been officials in the Roman government (such as mem-
bers of the Praetorian Guard; see 1:13) or servants who lived
and served in the emperor’s palace.



The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the
Colossians
c. a.d. 47–49
Paul’s fi rst
missionary
journey
c. a.d. 50
The Jerusalem
council
c. a.d. 50–53
Paul’s second
missionary
journey
Just as a child needs proper instruction early in life, so the early believers needed to be set on
the proper path with correct teaching. Paul wrote this letter to deal with a doctrinal heresy that
was creeping into the Colossian church. Although we are not told specifi cally what this heresy was,
we can pick up clues from Paul’s response. The error was probably a mixture of Judaism and an
early form of Gnosticism. The Colossian church was experiencing the same problems other early
churches had encountered. Certain members were teaching that the observance of Jewish rules
about food, the Sabbath, and special festivals would help believers to earn their salvation (see Gal.
3:23–25; 4:10, 11). At Colosse, however, some of the Gentile members were apparently also promot-
ing a form of mysticism that claimed that Jesus was a higher being, but
not God. Paul refutes these false doctrines by pointing to Christ. Jesus had
been the focus of Paul’s preaching from the beginning. In Colossians, Paul
reiterates the supremacy of Christ. It was because Jesus is divine that His
death reconciles believers to their Creator.
As in all of his epistles, Paul seems to write as though he had our own
society in mind. Even today, new cults claim to be Christian yet deny
the deity of Christ and the basic beliefs of Christianity. Many today view
Jesus as no more than “a great teacher.” Paul’s patient correction of the
Colossian believers should remind us that we need to keep the worship of
Jesus Christ central in our churches.
Author and Date • Pauline authorship of this letter has been univer-
sally recognized throughout church history. Paul identifi es himself as the
author of the letter three different times, describing himself as “an apostle
of Jesus Christ” and as a servant of the gospel. Furthermore Paul closes the
epistle with a handwritten greeting, a characteristic of several of his letters
(see 1 Cor. 16:21; 2 Thess. 3:17). The Muratorian fragment (a document
written around A.D. 180 that lists books considered by the early church to
be divinely inspired) includes Colossians as a Pauline epistle. Many church
fathers also upheld Paul as the author of Colossians. These include Justin
Martyr, Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, and Origen.
Paul probably wrote Colossians while imprisoned in Rome around A.D. 60.
Some have argued for other places of origin, such as Ephesus and Caesarea,
but there is not enough evidence to displace the traditional theory that
Paul wrote from his prison in Rome. Colossians is one of the four prison
epistles of Paul, along with Ephesians, Philippians, and Philemon. Because
Colossians, Ephesians, and Philemon have several similarities, many be-
lieve that the three were written at about the same time.
Setting • The city of Colosse was about a hundred miles east of
Ephesus, in the valley of the Lycus River. During the Persian Wars of the
fi fth century B.C., Colosse was a large and strategic city. By the time of the
apostle Paul, however, it had declined into the shadows of its two sister
cities, Laodicea and Hierapolis, and had become a small merchant town on
the trade route from Rome to the east.
c. a.d. 53–57
Paul’s third
missionary
journey
c. a.d. 54–56
The church
at Colosse is
started
c. a.d. 58
Paul is arrested
in Jerusalem
c. a.d. 60–62
Paul is
imprisoned in
Rome; Colossians
is written
c. a.d. 67
Peter and Paul
are executed
COLOSSIANS INTRODUCTION
1883
Evangelization of Colosse probably took place during Paul’s three-year stay in Ephesus. Luke re-
cords in Acts 19:10 that people throughout the Asian region heard the gospel. Apparently Epaphras
was converted in Ephesus, and after being instructed by Paul returned home to Colosse to proclaim
the gospel. Evidently the church that emerged was largely composed of Gentiles, for Paul refers to
their “uncircumcision,” a word employed by Paul to designate Gentiles (see 2:13; Rom. 2:24–27;
Eph. 2:11).
Relationship of Colossians to Philemon • The circumstances of Colossians and Philemon
are the same. Paul is imprisoned, along with others, for preaching the gospel (4:10; Philem. 1, 23).
The companions Paul lists are identical in the two letters, with the exception of Justus, who is
found only in the letter to Colossians (see 1:1; 4:9–14, 17; Philem. 1, 2, 10, 23, 24). Furthermore,
Onesimus (the slave of Philemon) went to Colosse with Tychicus, the bearer of the Colossian letter
(4:7–9). Thus the two letters are companion epistles: one for the Colossian church as a whole and
one addressed to a member of that church, Philemon.
Relationship of Colossians and Ephesians • The many parallels between Colossians and
Ephesians indicate that the two letters were written about the same time. Both letters reveal the cen-
trality of Christ and His relationship to the church. Ephesians shows Christ as Head of the church,
while Colossians extends that imagery of His authority over all creation (see 1:16–18; 2:10). In
Ephesians, Paul highlights how Christians are the members of the body of Christ, who is the Head.
In Colossians, he places emphasis on Christ the Head, of whose body Christians are members.
The differences in the epistles are signifi cant as well. Colossians stresses the completeness of the
believer in Christ; Ephesians points to Christian unity which is found in Christ. The mystery in
Colossians is that Christ is in believers (1:26, 27), while the mystery in Ephesians is the unity of
Jew and Gentile in Christ. Colossians speaks of Jesus as Lord over all creation, while Ephesians con-
cerns itself with Christ’s authority over the church. Finally, Colossians has a stronger tone because
it confronts a specifi c false teaching in Colosse. Ephesians has a softer tone; it does not address a
specifi c heresy.
But with all their similarities and differences, Ephesians and Colossians together present a ma-
ture understanding of who Christ is and what His life and death mean for the believer. From prison,
Paul was teaching the churches in Asia Minor how central the person of Jesus Christ is to the
Christian faith. He is the image of God, the source of all wisdom, and the Head of the church. He
is the One who reconciles us to God and to our fellow believers. As our Savior and Deliverer, He
deserves our sincere adoration and praise.
Christ in the Scriptures
Colossians is the one book in the New Testament that uniquely centers on the cosmic Christ—
“the head of all principality and power” (2:10). Paul wants us to know that in Jesus we see the face
of God: “He is the image of the invisible God” (1:15). As such, Jesus’ divine nature and incarnation
are celebrated as watershed realities. This image of the invisible God is the Author of reconciliation
(1:20–22; 2:13–15) and our Redeemer and Reconciler (2:11–15, 20–22). Because of those facts, it
only stands to reason that He is the basis for all believers’ hope (1:5, 23, 27).
1884